    Libraries |  pace@



        MIT Open Access Articles

 The Influence of Feelings While Driving Regular Cars
on the Perception and Acceptance of Self-Driving Cars



    The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please share
    how this access benefits you. Your story matters.


    Citation: Raue, Martina, D'Ambrosio, Lisa A., Ward, Carley, Lee, Chaiwoo, Jacquillat, Claire et al.
    2019. "The Influence of Feelings While Driving Regular Cars on the Perception and Acceptance of
    Self-Driving Cars." Risk Analysis, 39 (2).

    As Published: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/risa.13267

    Publisher: Wiley

    Persistent URL: https://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/140475

    Version: Author's final manuscript: final author's manuscript post peer review, without
    publisher's formatting or copy editing

    Terms of Use: Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be
    subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use.










    l | | 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

    AFFECTIVE DRIVING EXPERIENCE AND SELF-DRIVING CAR ACCEPTANCE    1


The Influence of Feelings while Driving Regular Cars on the Perception and Acceptance of Self-
                                         Driving Cars







    1
    Martina Raue1*, Lisa A. D’Ambrosio¹, Carley Ward , Chaiwoo Lee¹, Claire Jacquillat² & Joseph F.
    Coughlin    1





  1AgeLab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA





                    2Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University

                           5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, MA 15213










    *Address correspondence to Martina Raue, AgeLab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology




This is the author manuscript accepted for publication and has undergone full peer review but has not
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi:
10.1111/risa.13267.


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

    77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; maraue@mit.edu










        Abstract

Self-driving vehicles will affect the future of transportation, but factors that underlie perception and
acceptance of self-driving cars are yet unclear. Research on feelings-as-information and the affect
heuristic has suggested that feelings are an important source of information, especially in situations
of complexity and uncertainty. In this study (N = 1,484), we investigated how feelings related to
traditional driving affect risk perception, benefit perception and trust related to self-driving cars as
well as people’s acceptance of the technology. Due to limited experiences with and knowledge of
self-driving cars, we expected that feelings related to a similar experience, namely driving regular
cars, would influence judgments of self-driving cars. Our results support this assumption. While
positive feelings of enjoyment predicted higher benefit perception and trust, negative affect
predicted higher risk and higher benefit perception of self-driving cars. Feelings of control were
inversely related to risk and benefit perception, which is in line with research on the affect heuristic.
Furthermore, negative affect was an important source of information for judgments of use and
acceptance. Interest in using a self-driving car was also predicted by lower risk perception, higher
benefit perception and higher levels of trust in the technology. Although people’s individual
experiences with advanced vehicle technologies and knowledge were associated with perceptions
and acceptance, many simply have never been exposed to the technology and know little about it. In
the absence of this experience or knowledge, all that is left is the knowledge, experience and
feelings they have related to regular driving.





    KEY WORDS: Self-driving cars; affect heuristic; feelings as information




1. INTRODUCTION

Driving is the primary mode of transportation for the vast majority of adults in the United States,
with 222 million licensed drivers (Federal Highway Administration, 2015) and 85.6% commuting by
car (Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2017). There are many reasons for these high numbers,


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

ranging from the limited quality and coverage of public transit systems to individuals’ needs for
schedule flexibility (Donorfio, D'Ambrosio, Coughlin, & Mohyde, 2009; Vanderbilt, 2008). Driving is
also popular because many people report pure enjoyment around the experience of driving; they
may feel happy about the sense of freedom or independence they may have while driving. Despite
the joy driving may engender for many, it is not always a pleasurable experience. People also feel
rage or anger at traffic conditions or the behaviors of other drivers, and driving in certain
environments and contexts can lead to stress, such as when one is driving on unfamiliar roads, in
poor weather, in heavy traffic, or running late (Vanderbilt, 2008). The negative emotions that driving
may engender in some people have also been found to be connected to a greater likelihood of
crashes (Abdu, Shinar, & Meiran, 2012; Berdoulat, Vavassori, & Sastre, 2013; Dingus et al., 2016).

Self-driving cars have not yet entered consumer markets, but they have the potential to make
driving safer and travel more efficient. The World Health Organization reported in 2016 that road
traffic injuries were the leading cause of death among people aged 15 to 29 (World Health
Organization, 2016). In the US alone, over 37,000 people died in car crashes in 2016 (National
Highway Safety Traffic Administration., 2017). Removing human error from driving is one of the
greatest potential benefits of self-driving cars, as driver error could be directly or indirectly
responsible for as many as 94% of all traffic accidents (National Highway Safety Administration,
2015). Beyond decreasing the risk of an accident, self-driving cars have the potential to decrease
congestion, increase mobility, and yield more efficient use of commuting time. The rapidly growing
population of older drivers may especially benefit from self-driving cars (Center for Disease Control,
2016). Physical and cognitive declines associated with age often lead to a decrease in driving abilities
and limitations in mobility (Anstey & Wood, 2011), which in turn may leave people at a greater risk
for depression, social isolation, and other negative health outcomes (Chihuri et al., 2016; Marottoli
et al., 1997). Self-driving cars have the potential to reduce or eliminate the negative outcomes
associated with restricted mobility in an aging population.

It remains unclear, however, when or if self-driving vehicles will move from novelty in the news to
normal fixtures on the nation’s highways. Aside from the technical requirements inherent in such a
complex system, there is a question of people’s reactions to the technology. Previous work has
found that people’s risk and benefit perceptions as well as trust in the technology are related to its
acceptance (Bearth & Siegrist, 2016; Fischhoff, Slovic, Lichtenstein, Read, & Combs, 1978; Frewer,
Howard, & Shepherd, 1995; Siegrist, 2000), particularly for new innovations (Lee & See, 2004; Lee,
2009; Luo, Li, Zhang, & Shim, 2010). Here we examine the proposition that people’s assessments of
self-driving vehicles will be shaped by affect; it is always present when people make judgments
(Zajonc, 1980), and previous research has demonstrated that risk and benefit perceptions of new
technologies are often driven by feelings (Slovic & Peters, 2006; Slovic, Finucane, Peters, &
MacGregor, 2004). In this research, we specifically examine how people’s feelings around driving
traditional cars may affect their perceptions of risk and benefit of and trust in self-driving cars.
Further, we investigate how these feelings, perceptions and trust in turn influence people’s
acceptance of the technology.




    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

1.1. Public Perception of Risk
Laypeople often evaluate the risks and benefits of new technologies differently than experts, and
their perceptions of risk are also shaped by their perceptions of benefits the technology may offer.
For laypeople, risk perception tends to decrease when benefit perception increases, and vice versa
(Alhakami & Slovic, 1994). Past work has shown that laypeople’s perceptions of a new technology
can be affected by the characteristics of the technology itself and individual-level variables (see
Visschers & Siegrist, 2018 for an overview).

        The characteristics of the technology itself can be captured by two orthogonal dimensions:
dread risk and unknown risk. The more dreadful and unknown a new technology is thought to be,
the greater the public’s risk perception of it (Slovic, 1987; 2015). Dread risks include people’s
perceptions of the potential for lack of control, catastrophic outcomes and fatalities. Unknown risks
include perceived newness, lack of scientific knowledge, unobservable consequences and delay of
effects. These two dimensions of risk explain why some hazards are perceived as riskier than others
by the public, despite contrary statistical information from experts. As a result, familiarity may breed
contempt: common actions and activities are often not perceived as especially risky compared with
the unfamiliar or the novel (Hengstler, Enkel, & Duelli, 2016). For example, objectively risky activities
such as alcohol consumption or driving, which are perceived as non-dreadful and familiar, are also
perceived as not very risky by the public (Fox-Glassman & Weber, 2016).

        Individual-level factors that affect people’s perceptions of risk include knowledge and
affective associations. People’s levels of knowledge about a technology should affect the extent to
which they understand both its risks and benefits. Levels of subjective knowledge, or self-assessed
knowledge, have been associated with lower risks and greater benefits assessments and a greater
likelihood of acceptance of the technology. In contrast, objective measures of knowledge have
mixed impacts on risk and benefit assessments (Cousin & Siegrist, 2010; Visschers & Siegrist, 2018).
Further, people’s affective evaluations shape their risk assessments of new technologies, as affect
can serve as a “mental shortcut *relative to developing the expertise to assess the risks and benefits
of a technology scientifically] in which people rely on the positive or negative valence associated
with a hazard to judge its benefits and risks” (Visschers & Siegrist, 2018, p.11). Affect is often more
significant in judgments under uncertainty or in complex situations where people might lack the
knowledge, experience and/or the capacity to make a judgment, because their affective responses
serve as cues to simplify decisions (e.g., Lerner, Li, Valdesolo, & Kassam, 2015; Loewenstein &
Lerner, 2003; Slovic et al., 2004).

1.2. Feelings as Information
      As noted above, affect, in the form of a subtle feeling of positivity or negativity, can serve as a
decision heuristic that people use in situations of uncertainty and limited knowledge, known as the
affect heuristic (Slovic & Peters, 2006; Slovic, Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2003). People’s use of
feelings as a general source of information was extensively discussed by Schwarz and Clore (Schwarz,
2012; Schwarz & Clore, 1983; 2003), who termed it the “How do I feel about it heuristic.” The source
of feelings that people use to make judgments is not necessarily directly related to the stimulus at



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

hand. Integral affect is directly related to a stimulus, but incidental affect is independent of the
stimulus, and may result in misattribution and biased judgments (Lerner et al., 2015; Loewenstein &
Lerner, 2003).

      Both integral and incidental affect serve several functions in the formation of judgments:
information; common currency; spotlight; and motivator (Peters, Västfjäll, Gärling, & Slovic, 2006).
When affect serves as information to judge a new technology, for example, decision makers simply
consider how they feel about it (Schwarz, 1990; Schwarz & Clore, 2003). The basis of these feelings is
often prior experiences or thoughts related to the decision at hand (integral affect), but it could also
be a less relevant emotional state such as current mood (incidental affect; Peters et al., 2006). When
affect serves as common currency, different pieces of complex information can be compared in
terms of the affective responses they evoke in order to simplify the judgment process (Cabanac,
1992). Affect as a common currency extends the affect-as-information approach and allows simple
comparisons of positive and negative feelings rather than having to weight arguments (Tompkins,
Bjälkebring, & Peters, 2018). Affect as spotlight leads people to focus on new information in the
form of feelings (e.g., strong vs. weak, specific emotions), which in turn are used to guide judgment
(Peters et al., 2006). Affect can also motivate information processing and lead to approach or
avoidance behaviors (Chen & Bargh, 2016). Because people aim to maintain positive mood states,
even incidental mood can motivate behavior (Isen, 2000). For example, Hirshleifer and Shumway
(2003) reported that weather influenced stock market returns in 26 countries from 1982 to 1997;
sunshine in the city that hosted the country’s major stock exchange increased the likelihood that the
market went up. Presumably sunshine improved investors’ moods, which rendered them more
optimistic about the future of the economy.

      The nature or valence of the affect plays a role in how it is weighed in judgments. In particular,
people tend to attend to or weight negative information or emotions more heavily than positive
ones when making evaluations. People can report more negative emotion words than positive ones;
they are more likely to recall events that are negatively emotionally charged compared with positive
ones; and negative affect may prompt more cognitive processing than positive affect (Baumeister,
Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, & Vohs, 2001; Forgas, 1995; Schwarz & Clore, 2003). Thus, while both
positive and negative affect may have significant and independent effects on people’s evaluations,
negative affect may be more heavily weighted or important to people’s judgments.

The affect heuristic also serves as one explanation for the inverse relationship between risk and
benefit assessments. If people’s emotional responses are more positive, they tend to judge risks to
be lower and benefits to be higher; the more negative people’s affective reactions are, the more
likely they are to judge risks to be higher and benefits to be lower (Alhakami & Slovic, 1994; Slovic et
al., 2004). People may be particularly more likely to rely on their affective reactions as a common
source to generate both their risk and benefit evaluations when they lack expertise within a given
domain (Finucane, Alhakami, Slovic, & Johnson, 2000; Sokolowska & Sleboda, 2015).

      In sum, affect is often used to inform more complex decision problems. This impact of affect
tends to be more prominent under conditions characterized by higher levels of uncertainty (Faraji-


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Rad & Pham, 2017), less familiarity (e.g., Srull, 1984), and in more complex situations. Finally,
negative affect may be more significant in shaping people’s judgments than positive affect
(Baumeister et al., 2001).

1.3. Technology Acceptance
The affect heuristic suggests that affect shapes people’s willingness to adopt new technologies to
the extent that the technology is novel, its performance is uncertain, and its impacts are unknown.
In a recent review of the technology adoption literature, combined with user interviews, a number
of different factors that contribute to people’s willingness to accept and use new technologies were
identified, of which emotion is one: “Part of the attraction to any new product is its ability to link the
user to something they feel” (Lee & Coughlin, 2015, p. 753). Two additional variables Lee and
Coughlin (2015) consider in their review, usability and value, map on to ease of use and perceived
usefulness, key constructs from the widely used Technology Acceptance Model (TAM; Davis, Bagozzi,
& Warshaw, 1989). Perceived usefulness or the perceived potential benefits has been shown in
some empirical work to be a more significant factor in explaining adoption than ease of use (Lee,
Ward, Raue, D'Ambrosio, & Coughlin, 2017).

Other factors that have been identified as significant for understanding technology adoption include
the relevance of people’s previous experiences (including with the technology) and system reliability
– the ability of the system “to work without failure” (Lee et al., 2017). The concept of system
reliability, or the belief that the system will work as described, is a form of trust in the technology; it
is in essence the belief that the technology will deliver on its promised performance. Other research
has also suggested that trust in the technology may be a predictor of acceptance (Abraham et al.,
2016; Balfe, Sharples, & Wilson, 2018; Choi & Ji, 2015; Lee & See, 2004; Zmud, Sener, & Wagner,
2016).

While other factors such as accessibility or market availability are more important for explaining
technology acceptance for currently available technologies, emotion or affect should be particularly
important in influencing new technology adoption when people have limited knowledge of and
exposure to the technology and are uncertain about whether it will work, and when the wider
effects of the technology are unclear. Further, individual characteristics such as age, gender,
lifestyle, and comfort levels with different technologies may also affect people’s willingness to adopt
new technologies (Lee et al., 2017; Venkatesh, Thong, & Xu, 2012).

1.4. Current Research on Acceptance of Self-Driving Cars
Although fully self-driving cars have yet to enter the consumer market, there is a growing body of
research that attempts to understand the public’s attitudes toward and likely acceptance of these
vehicles. Studies have found that people’s degree of acceptance varies by individual characteristics,
with younger, male or more tech savvy people generally more interested in using self-driving cars
than older, female or less tech savvy people (Hohenberger, Spörrle, & Welpe, 2016; König &
Neumayr, 2017; Lee et al., 2017; Nielsen & Haustein, 2018).





    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Several studies have found that while most people do not embrace the technology completely,
neither are they completely opposed to it. In particular, people anticipate that the technology could
deliver benefits such as: fewer crashes, reduced severity of crashes, lower vehicle emissions, better
fuel economy, transportation solutions for older and disabled people, the possibility to engage in
other activities while on the road, greater safety, and greater convenience (Howard & Dai, 2013;
Hulse, Xie, & Galea, 2018; Nielsen & Haustein, 2018; Sanbonmatsu, Strayer, Yu, Biondi, & Cooper,
2018; Schoettle & Sivak, 2014).

Although the technology offers many promises, people typically harbor a number of reservations
about it (König & Neumayr, 2017). Concerns people have include the overall safety and reliability of
the technology, including the chances that the vehicles could be confused by unexpected situations;
people fear the possibility of equipment failure (Bansal & Kockelman, 2016; Bansal, Kockelman, &
Singh, 2016; Shabanpour, Golshani, Shamshiripour, & Mohammadian, 2018). Other risks people
perceive around the technology are unresolved legal liability issues, hacking, and the potential
disclosure of personal data or of tracking (Howard & Dai, 2013; König & Neumayr, 2017; Kyriakidis,
Happee, & de Winter, 2015; Schoettle & Sivak, 2014; Shabanpour et al., 2018).

People’s hesitations around the acceptance of automated vehicle technologies may also be tied to
their feelings around driving itself, and many people report driving to be positive for them. For
example, in a study that compared all levels of automation (from manual [fully human controlled] to
fully automated), participants found manual driving the most enjoyable (Kyriakidis et al., 2015). In
another study, most people were willing to accept automated features that assisted the driver while
the driver remained in control, but fewer people were comfortable with full automation (Abraham
et al., 2018). Consistent with these results, yielding control was a major barrier to adoption of self-
driving cars among regular commuters (Howard & Dai, 2013). Because self-driving cars represent a
fundamental change in the driving task, people’s current feelings about driving traditional vehicles
may shape how they assess changes or alternatives to it.

1.5. The Present Study
The present study focuses on how feelings experienced while driving influence risk and benefit
perceptions as well as trust in self-driving cars and how, in turn, these perceptions affect the
acceptance of these vehicles. Based on the affect heuristic and the feelings-as-information approach,
we assume that people will use their feelings about driving their current vehicles to judge self-
driving cars because of their limited knowledge or experience with automated vehicle technology
itself. We hypothesize that feelings related to their experience as drivers of regular cars may carry-
over when judging self-driving cars (e.g., Lerner et al., 2015; Peters et al., 2006). Further, because
self-driving cars represent a change to the driving status quo, how people feel about driving now
should affect how they react to a potential change to it. In particular, we assume that people’s
affective experiences with their own driving rather than a deliberate analysis of advantages and
disadvantages will in part shape their judgments of self-driving cars. Because the affect measures are
related to a different technology than the outcome, however, we approached this question in an
exploratory manner and formulated the following research question: How do feelings related to



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

human-operated driving influence risk and benefit perceptions of, as well as trust in, self-driving
cars?

    Based on other literature that has examined people’s risk and benefit perceptions and trust, we
entered additional predictors related to gender, knowledge (about self-driving cars, but also
whether participants knew of any accidents involving self-driving cars) and experience. We asked
about driving experience, but also experience with vehicle automation features currently on the
market (e.g., cruise control, lane keeping, collision avoidance systems). Education was included as an
additional control variable (for an overview see Chauvin, 2018; Visschers & Siegrist, 2018).

Further, we assumed that acceptance of self-driving cars would be predicted by people’s risk and
benefit perceptions of and trust in the technology. Based on previous research, we expected that
high benefit perceptions and high trust would increase acceptance of self-driving cars, while high risk
perceptions would decrease acceptance (Davis et al., 1989; Lee & See, 2004; Siegrist, 1999). Drawing
on models of technology acceptance (Lee & Coughlin, 2015; Venkatesh et al., 2012), people’s
affective reactions to driving, knowledge, experience and gender were included in the model.
Education was again added as a control variable.


2. METHOD

2.1. Participants
We conducted a nationwide online survey in the United States in summer 2016 of 1,748 participants
who were recruited through Qualtrics, an online market research company. The majority of
participants had a valid driver’s license at the time of data collection (89.2%); those who did not
were excluded from the analysis. We also excluded participants who gave nonsensical answers (e.g.,
birthyear before 1900, random letters when asked to describe what a self-driving car was in their
own words). The remaining 1,484 participants were between the ages of 18 and 89 (M = 49.87, SD =
17.73, 45% female). Of those participants, 80% were white, 8% black, 5% Asian American, 3% Latinx,
and 4% identified as other or multiracial. Most participants had a college degree (27%) or some
college (25%), 17% had a post-graduate degree or had completed some post-graduate work, 12%
had an associate’s degree, and 19% had a high school diploma. About one-third of participants were
employed full-time (34%), 10% were employed part-time, 9% were not employed, 6% were self-
employed, 29% were retired, 4% were students, and 8% homemakers. The majority of participants
had annual household incomes below $74,999 (51% less than $50,000 and 21% below $25,000), 15%
had incomes between $75,000 and $99,999, and 12% had incomes of $100,000 or more.

2.2. Measures
Knowledge of self-driving cars was measured by two variables: participants’ self-reported knowledge
and an indicator for whether they had heard any media stories about accidents involving self-driving
cars (see Table I for details on the items included in this analysis). Following the self-reported
knowledge measure in the beginning of the questionnaire, respondents were then provided the
following definition of a self-driving car: “For the purpose of this study, we define self-driving cars as


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

those in which operation of the vehicle occurs without the driver controlling the steering,
acceleration, and braking; the driver is not expected to constantly monitor the roadway.” Risk and
benefit perceptions were captured by respondents indicating how risky and how beneficial they
thought it was to use a self-driving car. We measured participants’ trust in a self-driving car to work
reliably under certain conditions with three items that were scaled together. Willingness to adopt or
accept self-driving cars was measured by self-reported interest in using them and, at a later point in
the questionnaire, by asking people whether they would let a child (under 5 years, between 5 and 12
years, and between 13 and 17 years of age) use a self-driving car alone. The latter use cases for self-
driving cars correspond roughly to different developmental stages for children – preschool,
childhood and adolescence, respectively.

Participants indicated for how long they had been drivers and how many days a week they drove.
Most of the participants self-reported as frequent drivers, with 67.4% driving at least five days per
week and 34.2% driving every day. Years as a driver and age were strongly and positively correlated,
r = .95, p < .001, so in the following analyses we included only years as a driver in the model. We
further asked participants about their experience with advanced vehicle technologies currently on
the market.

Participants used the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) to report feelings they typically
experienced while driving (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). The PANAS has been used
before in other studies on public acceptance of new technologies (Lara, Pascual, Borondo, & Pino,
2016; Pelegrín-Borondo, Reinares-Lara, & Olarte-Pascual, 2017; Turner, Love, & Howell, 2008) and
has been well validated as a measure of affect. The questionnaire concluded with additional
demographic items.

Table I. Items used in the study
Variable                Item Wording                                          Response Options      M (SD) or % yes

Knowledge

Knowledge about self-   How much do you know about self-driving cars?         From 1 (no            2.59 (1.03)
driving cars                                                                  knowledge) to

                                                                              5 (a great deal of
                                                                              knowledge)

Heard of self-driving   Have you heard any stories about self-driving cars    Yes, No, Do not       35.1%
car accident            that have been involved in accidents or fatalities?   know

Experience

Experience with         Please indicate how much experience you have with     From 1 (very little   2.02 (1.03)
advanced vehicle        each vehicle technology                               experience) to 5 (a
technologies                                                                  great deal of
                        -   Cruise control                                    experience)

                        -   Adaptive cruise control

                        -   Adaptive/smart headlights




This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

                    -   Automatic emergency braking

                    -   Autopilot

                    -   Blind spot detection

                    -   Forward collision warning

                    -   Lane centering/lane keeping assist

                    -   Lane departure warning

                    -   Parking assist

                    -   Pilot assist

                    -   Traffic jam assist

                    D = .95

Years as a driver   For how many years have you been a driver?                Open answer (years)     31.19 (18.55)

Driving frequency   On average, how many days a week do you drive?            Open answer from 0      5.15 (1.81)
                                                                              to 7

Feelings

PANAS               For each of the following, please select how much         From 1 (very slightly   PA-Enjoyment:
                    you feel like this when you are driving (items were       or not at all) to 5     3.06 (1.00)
                    randomized):                                              (extremely)
                                                                                                      PA-Control
                                                                                                      (attentive, alert):
                                                                                                      4.27 (0.79)
                    Positive Affect (PA): Excited, Determined, Strong,
                    Proud, Inspired, Active, Alert, Interested, Attentive,                            NA: 1.42 (0.64)
                    Enthusiastic

                    D = .89 (PA-Enjoyment D = .91, PA-Control D = .68)



                        Negative Affect (NA): Afraid, Irritable, Guilty, Hostile,
                        Ashamed, Nervous, Distressed, Jittery, Scared,
                        Upset

                        D = .93

Perceptions & Trust

Risk perception         How risky do you think it is to use a self-driving car?   From 1 (not at all)   3.24 (1.12)

                                                                                  to 5 (very much)

Benefit perception      How beneficial do you think it is to use a self-driving   From 1 (not at all)   3.07 (1.24)
                        car?
                                                                                  to 5 (very much)

Trust in self-driving   How much would you trust self-driving cars to do the      From 1 (low trust)    2.69 (1.13)
cars                    following?
                                                                                  to 5 (high trust)
                        -   Work reliably
                        -   Work properly in poor weather conditions
                        -   Work properly on old streets in need of repair




This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

                                D = .92

    Acceptance

    Interest in using a self-   How interested are you in using a self-driving car?   From 1 (not at all)      2.58 (1.41)
    driving car
                                                                                      to 5 (very much)

    Willingness to let a        Would you let a child use a self-driving car alone?   Yes, No, Do not
    child use a self-driving                                                          know
    car                         -   A child who is under 5 years old                                       -   1%
                                -   A child who is between 5 and 12 years old
                                -   A child who is between 13 and 17 years old                             -   3.2%

                                                                                                           -   18.9%



2.3. Feelings Related to Driving
The driving experience can engender a number of different emotions spanning various intensities
and dimensions of positivity and negativity. We conducted an exploratory factor analysis of the 20
PANAS items with principal factor extraction and varimax rotation. The Keiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO)
indicated an adequate sample (KMO = .94), and Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity indicated strong
collinearity, χ² (190) = 17229.47, p < .001. The extraction revealed three factors with Eigenvalues
greater than 1, with 63.75% of the cumulative variance explained (32.81%, 24.51%, and 6.43% for
each factor). The negative affect (NA) scale was identified as the first component, but the items that
traditionally make up the positive affect (PA) scale were split into two factors which we labeled
control (attentive, alert) and enjoyment (remaining positive items). Table II displays a correlation
matrix of the key variables included in the analysis.


    3. RESULTS



    Table II. Correlations of all variables

                            1       2       3     4 5 6 7                             8 9                  10

    1   Self-reported
        knowledge of self-
        driving cars

    2   Experience with     .42**
        advanced vehicle
        technologies

    3   Years as a driver   -.31**  -.35**

    4   Driving frequency   .15**   .21**   -.15**



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

    5   Positive affect -   .26**   .46**   -.14**  .17**
        enjoyment

    6   Positive affect -   .01     -.03    .17**   -.03   .31**
        control

    7   Negative affect     .22**   .29**   -.38**  .03    .14**  -.20**

    8   Risk perception     -.09**  -.10**  .07**   -.01   -.01   .07**  .02

9 Benefit perception .37** .35** -.30** .09** .25** -.06* .22** -.46**

10 Trust in self-driving .38** .43** -.28** .13** .27** -.05 .21** -.49** .64**
   cars

11 Interest in using a .45** .43** -.39** .11** .28** -.08** .28** -.44** .80** .69**
   self-driving car


    *p < .05, **p < .01.

    N = 1484


3.1. Perceptions of Self-Driving Cars
To examine the influence of feelings related to driving on risk perception, benefit perception and
trust in self-driving cars, we conducted linear regression analyses. The results of these analyses are
shown in Table III. Higher risk perception was predicted by less experience with advanced vehicle
technologies, higher levels of positive affect (control), higher levels of negative affect experienced
while driving, and being female. Higher benefit perception was related to having fewer years as a
driver, greater self-reported knowledge of self-driving cars, more experience with advanced vehicle
technologies, lower levels of positive affect (control), higher levels of positive affect (enjoyment),
higher levels of negative affect, and being male. Trust in self-driving cars was related to having fewer
years as a driver, greater self-reported knowledge of self-driving cars, more experience with
advanced vehicle technologies, no knowledge of any accidents involving a self-driving car, positive
affect (enjoyment) experienced while driving, and being male.



    Table III. Regression Analyses: Risk Perception, Benefit Perception, and Trust as Dependent Variables

    Dependent Variable                      Risk Perception      Benefit Perception  Trust in Self-Driving
                                                                                              Cars

                                            b       S.E.     ß   b       S.E. ß     b         S.E. ß

    Technology Knowledge



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Self-reported knowledge of self-                              0.26*                    0.23*
driving cars                          -0.06    0.03   -0.05   **       0.03    0.22    **      0.03    0.21

Heard of self-driving car accident²   0.11     0.06   0.05    -0.09    0.06    -0.04   -0.14*  0.06    -0.06

Experience

Experience with advanced                                      0.16*                    0.26*
vehicle technologies                  -0.09*   0.04   -0.08   **       0.04    0.13    **      0.03    0.24

                                                              -                        -
                                                              0.009                    0.006
Years as a driver                     0.003   0.002   0.05    ***      0.002   -0.14   ***     0.002   -0.10

Frequency of driving per week         0.02     0.02   0.03    -0.01    0.02    -0.02   0.003   0.02    0.004

Affect

Positive affect: control              0.10*    0.04   0.07    -0.09*   0.04    -0.06   -0.06   0.04    -0.04

                                                              0.15*                    0.10*
Positive affect: enjoyment            0.01     0.04   0.01    **       0.04    0.12    *       0.03    0.09

                                      0.15*
Negative affect                       *        0.05   0.08    0.11*    0.05    0.06    0.05    0.05    0.03

Demographics

                                      0.16*
Gender¹                               *        0.06   0.07    -0.15*   0.06    -0.06   -0.13*  0.05    -0.06

Education                             -0.02    0.02  -0.02    0.01     0.02    0.02    0.02    0.02    0.03

R²                                             .03                             .22                     .258

    F(df₁, df₂)                          4.55*** (10, 1473)            42.35*** (10, 1473)     51.27*** (10, 1473)



1Gender was coded 0 = men, 1 = women

2Variable was coded as 0 = no / do not know, 1 = yes, heard stories

*p < .05, **p < .01, and ***p < .001.










This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

3.2. Acceptance of Self-Driving Cars

3.2.1. Interest in Using a Self-Driving Car
To investigate the influences of risk perception, benefit perception and trust on acceptance of self-
driving cars, we conducted linear regression analyses with the dependent variable interest in using a
self-driving car. We included the same variables as in the previous analyses to measure their direct
influence on interest in using a self-driving car, but added risk perception, benefit perception and
trust in self-driving cars to the model. The results of this analysis are displayed in Table IV. Risk
perception, benefit perception and trust were all significant predictors, but benefit perception had
the largest effect size among the three. Experiencing more negative affect when driving regular cars,
more experience with advanced vehicle technologies, greater self-reported knowledge of self-driving
cars, and fewer years as a driver were also related to interest in using a self-driving car. The effect
size of risk perception was smaller compared with those for benefit perception and trust, which is
consistent with the smaller explained variance in the model for risk perception (3%) as opposed to
the models for benefit perception (22%) and trust (26%). Overall, this model accounted for over 72%
of variance in the interest in use variable.





Table IV. Regression Analyses: Interest in Using a Self-Driving Car as Dependent Variable

 Dependent Variable Interest in Using a Self-Driving Car

        b S.E. ß

 Risk perception -0.09*** 0.02 -0.07

 Benefit perception 0.60*** 0.02 0.53

 Trust in self-driving cars 0.27*** 0.03 0.22

 Knowledge

 Self-reported knowledge of self-driving cars 0.15*** 0.02 0.11

 Heard of self-driving car accident² -0.08 0.04 -0.03

 Experience

 Experience with advanced

 vehicle technologies 0.05* 0.02 0.04

 Years as a driver -0.007*** 0.001 -0.10

 Frequency of driving per week -0.007 0.01 -0.01




    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Affect

Positive affect: control -0.03 0.03 -0.02

Positive affect: enjoyment 0.03 0.02 0.02

Negative affect 0.08* 0.03 0.03

Demographics

Gender¹ -0.009 0.04 -0.003

Education 0.004 0.01 0.005

R² .72

F(df₁, df₂) 294.33***(13,1470)


    1Gender was coded 0 = men, 1 = women;

    2Variable was coded as 0 = no / do not know, 1 = yes, heard stories

    *p < .05, **p < .01, and ***p < .001.






3.2.2. Acceptance of self-driving cars in special use conditions
An alternative measure of acceptance was whether participants would let a child ride in a self-
driving car alone. In general, respondents were reluctant to do so. Only 1% of participants indicated
that they would let a child under age 5 use a self-driving car alone. Slightly more (3.2%) would let a
child between ages 5 and 12 use a self-driving car alone and 18.9% (n = 280) a child between 13 and
17 years of age. To explore the impact of risk and benefit perceptions, trust, knowledge, experience,
and affect on this measure of acceptance, we conducted a logistic regression with whether one
would let a child between the ages 13 and 17 ride in a self-driving car alone as the dependent
variable (see Table V; analyses for the younger age groups were not conducted due to the small
number of those who would let a child ride alone). In line with the results in Table IV on interest in
using a self-driving car (interest in use), this analysis revealed that risk perception, benefit
perception and trust were all significant predictors of likelihood of agreeing to let a child ages 13 to
17 use a self-driving car alone: greater risk perception was associated with a reduced likelihood, and
greater benefit perception and greater trust were associated with a greater likelihood. Unlike the
interest in use results, neither of the knowledge variables was a significant predictor, and only years
of experience as a driver was significant among the experience variables; participants with fewer
years of driving experience were more likely to say that they would let a child ages 13 to 17 ride in a
self-driving car alone. Consistent with the interest in use results, experiencing more negative affect



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

when driving regular cars was associated with a greater likelihood of agreeing to let a child use a
self-driving car alone, and neither of the positive affect measures was significant. Different from the
interest in use model, however, was that negative affect, benefit perception and trust all had similar
impacts (in terms of effect size) on the dependent variable. Also different from the interest in use
model was that gender and higher levels of education were significant predictors of people’s
likelihood of agreeing to let a child ages 13 to 17 use a self-driving car alone. People with higher
levels of education and men were more likely to agree to let them to ride alone.



    Table V. Logistic Regression: Would you let a child between the ages of 13 and 17 ride in self-driving
    car alone?



Dependent Variable Let a child ride alone

        b S.E. Exp(B)

Risk perception -0.32*** 0.08 0.72

Benefit perception 0.46*** 0.09 1.58

Trust in self-driving cars 0.39*** 0.10 1.48

Knowledge

Knowledge about self-driving cars 0.06 0.09 1.06

Heard of self-driving car accident² -0.08 0.17 0.93

Experience

Experience with advanced

vehicle technologies -0.03 0.09 0.97

Years as a driver -0.02** 0.005 0.98

Frequency of driving per week -0.08 0.05 0.93

Affect

Positive affect: control -0.008 0.10 0.99

Positive affect: enjoyment -0.009 0.10 0.99

Negative affect 0.30** 0.11 1.35

Demographics

Gender¹ -0.66*** 0.16 0.52




    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Education 0.10* 0.05 1.10

R² (Nagelkerke) .31

χ² (df) Model 310.30***(13)






    1Gender was coded 0 = men, 1 = women;

    2Variable was coded as 0 = no / do not know, 1 = yes, heard stories

    *p < .05, **p < .01, and ***p < .001.



4. DISCUSSION

    Judging whether one would use a self-driving car without ever having seen one or experienced
riding in one is a difficult task. When judgments involve complexity and uncertainty, people often
rely on how they feel about it rather than engaging in effortful reasoning about arguments for their
judgments. Drawing on decades of research on feelings as a source of information and decision
heuristic (e.g., Lerner et al., 2015; Loewenstein & Lerner, 2003; Schwarz, 1990; Slovic & Peters, 2006;
Zajonc, 1980), we hypothesized that people use their feelings to inform their judgments of self-
driving cars. In this case we examined how feelings about a similar well-known technology, namely
traditional driving, shaped people’s perceptions about a slightly different technology, self-driving
cars. The results of this work not only contribute to an understanding of people’s perceptions and
acceptance of self-driving cars, but also have theoretical implications in demonstrating that feelings
about a target or an experience similar to that being judged can serve as information that shapes
assessments. Further, the analysis here reinforces the importance of considering the
multidimensional nature of affect (see Lerner et al., 2015 for a discussion). Instead of simply positive
and negative PANAS factors, our data revealed three factors, with items traditionally capturing
positive affect splitting into two variables that we labeled enjoyment and control.

4.1. Risk and Benefit Perception and Trust
Our results indicate that feelings experienced while driving regular cars inform people’s risk and
benefit perceptions of as well as their trust in self-driving cars (e.g., Schwarz, 1990; Zajonc, 1980).
We asked about people’s affective experiences driving traditional vehicles—not self-driving cars;
nevertheless, people’s feelings about the more familiar driving of current vehicles carried over to
their assessments of self-driving cars. One possible explanation for the transfer of affective impact in
this case is that self-driving cars essentially represent a change to the status quo, in which humans
bear the obligation for the driving task. For people who do not enjoy the responsibilities of driving or


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

who find the driving experience to be burdensome or unpleasant (either because they would prefer
to be doing something else or because they dislike the driving environment, for example), self-
driving cars offer an enticing promise: people can still get where they need to go without having to
navigate the driving experience and with the opportunity to use their driving time for some other
tasks or purpose. As a result, one’s attitudes about the status quo should inform perceptions of
change to it.

In line with the literature (Baumeister et al., 2001), negative affect seems to be a particularly
important source of information when judging both risks and benefits of self-driving cars. People
who experienced high levels of negative affect had both higher risk and higher benefit perceptions
of self-driving cars. This is contrary to what we would expect from research on the affect heuristic
(Finucane et al., 2000), which suggests that negative affect should have opposite effects on risk and
benefit perceptions. It may be possible, however, that participants who reported negative affect
around driving may also have perceived certain specific or concrete features of self-driving cars to be
beneficial – such as making the driving experience safer. This focus on certain details of the new
technology would be in line with research showing that negative affect increases systematic
processing of information (Forgas, 1995; Schwarz & Clore, 2003). While participants were not put in
a negative mood, negative affect around driving may have still led to a more careful analysis of risks
and benefits of self-driving cars. And when participants make judgments on a more concrete level,
previous research has found that the inverse relationship of risk and benefit perceptions is reduced
or eliminated (Sokolowska & Sleboda, 2015).

Unlike the risk and benefit models, trust was not influenced by negative affect. One possible
explanation is that judgments of trust do not necessarily trigger an implicit comparison between the
status quo and a new technology, which would lead people to rely on negative affect. A second
possible explanation is that our measure of negative affect was about current driving and not self-
driving cars. If our measure had been about self-driving vehicle technologies, we may have observed
different results.

Positive affect (enjoyment), related to people’s reports of excitement and enthusiasm around
driving, predicted benefit perceptions of self-driving cars but not risk perception. Because positive
affect is associated with more automatic processing, people who have more positive associations
with driving may also be less inclined to deliberate about potential risks associated with self-driving
cars. Thus, positive affect (enjoyment) may actually be capturing a positive attitude toward driving
or mobility in general, regardless of vehicle type, yielding a relationship between positive affect and
benefit perceptions of self-driving cars. For these people the value in driving may be more
instrumental, rather than intrinsic.

This inverse relationship between risk and benefit perceptions is reflected in the impacts of positive
affect (control) on these variables, although it was flipped: positive affect (control) was positively
related to risk perception and negatively related to benefit perception. The change in status quo –
from an active driver to a passive driver – may be perceived as a loss among those who value the
feeling of control when driving. Loss aversion has a strong influence on human behavior (Kahneman,


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Knetsch, & Thaler, 1991; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981); thus, an anticipated loss of control may result
in negative affective reactions when judging self-driving cars. This negative affect would explain
higher risk and lower benefit perception of self-driving cars.

Additional analysis with variables included in the survey indicates a strong positive correlation
between positive affect (control) and confidence in one’s ability to execute various driving tasks
successfully (e.g., react quickly to a change in the environment, reverse a vehicle in a straight line), r
= .38, p < .01 (see Table A1 for detailed results). Thus, those who reported more feelings of control
while driving were also more likely to be people who reported greater self-confidence in their own
driving skills or competency. As a result, they may be even more hesitant to give up driving in its
current form as it is a skill they believe they perform well, and they may be more suspicious of a self-
driving car’s ability to handle the variety and complexity of driving challenges across a range of
different environments as well as human operators do. Based on this, we should expect that the
positive affect (control) variable should be negatively related to trust in self-driving cars: people who
value their control and role as driver should be less likely to trust that a technology could replace
what they do. The results in Table III are suggestive but not conclusive; the coefficient on the
positive affect (control) variable is negative but is not statistically significant with a two-tailed test.

Taken together, our results suggest that affective information people have about driving influences
their judgments about self-driving cars, but that when the affective measure is similar but not
identical to the target, it is key to understand what the affect is capturing. Because control more
directly links both types of technologies through the change in status quo (having control in one type
of vehicle and having to give it up in the other), the affect heuristic may be applicable. Future studies
should investigate how affect toward similar targets may influence judgments of the target,
particularly in cases of new technologies. Work should also delve into these affective assessments to
explore whether they represent more global evaluations (e.g., driving or mobility generally) or more
specific contexts (e.g., driving human operated vehicles). The affect questions people answered
were about “driving;” had they been asked about “driving your current vehicle” or “driving human-
operated cars” the answers we received and the analysis of the positive affect (enjoyment) and
negative affect variables may have differed.

Beyond the affect measures, as the risk perceptions literature would predict (Slovic, 1987; 2015),
there was evidence that experience and knowledge shaped people’s risk and benefit perceptions.
People who had greater experience with advanced vehicle technologies had lower risk and higher
benefit perceptions as well as higher trust ratings of self-driving cars, consistent with other literature
on new vehicle technologies (Abraham et al., 2018; Balfe et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018). Years of
experience as a driver were not related to risk perception but were negatively related to benefit
perceptions of and trust in self-driving cars. Thus, people with presumably greater levels of expertise
as drivers were less likely to see the benefits of the technology – or of making a change to their
mobility habits – and less likely to trust the technology to perform. Again, this may be a result of
being averse to the potential loss of control and giving up a skill they manage well and have been
engaged in for many years. Expertise as a driver, however, was unrelated to risk perception – newer
and more experienced drivers alike were just as likely to see the risks self-driving cars posed.


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Higher levels of self-reported knowledge were linked to higher perceived benefits of and higher
levels of trust in self-driving cars, but like years of driving experience it was not associated with risk
perceptions. People who thought they knew more and those who thought they knew less were just
as likely to see the risks around self-driving cars. The other measure of knowledge, whether
participants had heard any stories about accidents involving self-driving cars, was only associated
with trust: those who said they had heard such stories reported lower trust levels in self-driving cars.
Past work has shown that trust in particular can be quite fragile and can be easily destroyed by a
single negative story (e.g., Slovic, 1999), so trust in self-driving cars may be more susceptible to the
impact of negative information than risk and benefit assessments.

4.2. Acceptance of Self-Driving Car Technologies

In the second part of the analysis, we investigated how risk perception, benefit perception and trust
in self-driving cars in turn affect interest in people’s willingness to accept self-driving cars, as
measured by interest in using a self-driving car and use by adolescents alone. In line with the
literature (Davis et al., 1989; Lee & See, 2004; Siegrist, 1999), we found support for all three
hypotheses that lower risk perception, higher benefit perception and higher levels of trust in self-
driving cars were associated with greater interest in using a self-driving car. While the coefficients
for all of these variables were statistically significant, the size of the coefficient for benefit
perception on interest in using a self-driving car was particularly notable. This result is supported by
the literature on technology adoption, which identified perceived benefits (or perceived usefulness
of a technology) as well as trust in the technology (or system reliability), as significant factors
underlying technology adoption (Davis et al., 1989; Lee & Coughlin, 2015).

We also assumed that affect should be particularly important in people’s interest in using a self-
driving car due limited knowledge of and exposure to this technology. When risk and benefit
perceptions and trust in the technology were controlled, however, only higher levels of negative
affect related to driving predicted greater interest in using a self-driving car; neither positive affect
(control) nor positive affect (enjoyment) was a significant predictor. This result underscores the
importance of negative affect as an antecedent of people’s opinions (e.g., Baumeister et al., 2001;
Zajonc, 1981) as well as the possibility that negative affect is more likely to carry over from a similar
technology to predict the use of a new technology because it is related to more systematic
processing.

In line with research on technology acceptance (e.g., Cousin & Siegrist, 2010; Lee & Coughlin, 2015),
greater subjective knowledge of self-driving cars was positively related to interest in using them.
Knowledge of any accidents involving self-driving cars did not predict interest in using them, once
risk and benefit perceptions and trust in the technology were controlled for, but one question is how
the findings here may have differed had the item been about ongoing or regular use of the
technology, as opposed to a more generic “interest in use,” which people might interpret as “trying
the technology out some time.” More experience with advanced vehicle technologies was positively
related to interest in using self-driving cars, controlling for other variables in the model, but more
experienced drivers were less interested in using self-driving cars. For these participants, driving may


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

have become a habit so ingrained in their daily lives that they saw little incentive to change from
their current technology. This finding is of note because driving experience was so strongly
correlated with age, and because older drivers might benefit particularly from self-driving cars if they
confront health and functional challenges that impede their abilities to drive a human-operated
vehicle safely (Anstey & Wood, 2011).

We measured technology acceptance with a second variable, people’s willingness to let a child
between the ages of 12 and 17 ride in a self-driving car alone. Similar to the interest in use measure,
willingness to let a child ride alone was predicted by lower risk perception, higher benefit
perception, higher trust in self-driving cars and higher levels of negative affect while driving. In a
rational agent model – or one in which people make logically rational decisions (see Kahneman &
Tversky, 1984 for an overview) – one would not expect differences between using a car for oneself
or letting a child ride in it. Not surprisingly, this is not what we found. In contrast to the interest in
use model, neither of the knowledge of self-driving cars variables was a significant predictor.
Experience with advanced vehicle technologies also did not predict willingness to let an adolescent
ride alone, but years of experience as a driver was significant. As years of driving experience
increased, the likelihood of agreement decreased, controlling for other variables in the model. In this
model gender and education also affected people’s likelihood of agreement, controlling for other
variables: women were less likely to agree; and as people’s levels of education increased, they were
less likely to agree to let an adolescent ride alone. Thus, when it came to a decision about letting a
child ride in a self-driving car alone, risk and benefit perceptions, trust and negative affect were all
significant, but women and people with higher levels of education tended to be more cautious than
in the use case for themselves.

4.4. Limitations
Due to the cross-sectional study design, we cannot examine how people’s opinions and judgments
change over time or in response to new information about self-driving cars or experiences with
advanced vehicle technologies. We can only examine the direction and magnitude of relationships of
the self-reported measures we have in the sample. The model in Table III explained a relatively small
amount of variance in the risk perception variable, particularly compared to the benefit perception
and trust variables. The inclusion of additional other predictors may be essential to explain and
understand what shapes people’s risk perceptions of self-driving cars. One such variable that could
be key to include is social trust. In this study trust was measured as trust in technology performance
rather than trust in technology producers (i.e., social trust). While both types of trust matter for
people’s perceptions, social trust has been identified as an important predictor of risk and benefit
perceptions and ultimately acceptance of new technologies (Siegrist, 1999; Siegrist & Cvetkovich,
2000; Siegrist, Cousin, Kastenholz, & Wiek, 2007; Siegrist, Cvetkovich, & Roth, 2000). Considering
social trust may improve the prediction of trust in performance, benefit and in particular risk
perceptions when affect has already been considered (Siegrist, Earle, & Gutscher, 2003). Another
variable that may influence risk perception is negative media coverage around self-driving cars.
Having heard of accidents related to self-driving cars did negatively influence trust in them, but not
participants’ risk perception. However, future research may consider studying media coverage in a



    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

more nuanced way, as most people’s current knowledge of self-driving cars comes from the media,
which often portray the technology negatively by focusing on risks rather than benefits and
reporting extensively and dramatically about accidents and legal or ethical issues (e.g., Borchers,
2013; Goidel & Langley, 1995). Significant media coverage with affect-laden images and stories also
makes events like accidents more vivid and easily available in people’s minds, which in turn can
increase people’s perceptions of risk (Raue & Scholl, 2018; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).

        Furthermore, there are some limitations and cautions around using the PANAS and global
measures of affect generally, despite the use of the PANAS in prior studies on technology
acceptance. First, in this study we focus on affect around “driving” but use these measures to
explore people’s judgments around a new driving technology. While we demonstrate the impact of
these affective responses, people’s affect toward the experience of driving may differ from their
affect around current vehicle technologies, which may also differ from their affect toward self-
driving cars in particular. Second, particular emotional reactions may be more powerful in
understanding risk and benefit perceptions, trust in and adoption of new technologies. Some of the
so-called basic emotions – such as anger and fear – are absent from the usual PANAS inventory, but
they may be important when it comes to technology adoption. For example, fear of a new
technology or anger with a current technology may be powerful motivators around acceptance (see
Lerner & Keltner, 2001 for the influence of fear and anger on risk perception). Future work should
explore how some of these individual emotions, as well as more global affective assessments,
contribute to risk and benefit perceptions and to acceptance.

4.5 Conclusions
In this study we found evidence that affect related to regular driving influences people’s perceptions
and acceptance of self-driving cars. Self-driving cars are a new technology, and relatively few people
have had any direct experience with it at this point. Although subjective knowledge of and
experience with advanced vehicle technologies were significant predictors of perceptions of and
interest in using self-driving cars, our results illustrate how affect around the experience of using a
similar technology – driving current vehicles – might shape people’s assessments of a new
technology. In the case of self-driving cars and new technologies more generally, our results suggest
that it may be important to consider whether and in what ways these technologies disrupt
individuals’ senses of autonomy and control. Giving up control may, in fact, be one of the major
barriers to the adoption of self-driving cars (Abraham et al., 2018; Howard & Dai, 2013; Kyriakidis et
al., 2015). As technologies and automated systems continue to take on tasks once reserved for
humans, understanding how people make judgments about them, and how these judgments affect
their acceptance and use, will become increasingly important.

Our results further underscore the significance of benefit perception for understanding technology
acceptance. As self-driving cars are still more conceptual than tangible, their usefulness may not be
obvious to many, but so too may the risks of such technologies not be fully understood. As the
technology continues to mature and become more widely adopted, it may be especially important to
communicate to the public about its benefits and risks, so that communities can make better
decisions about how they want to use and interact with the technology.


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported in part by grants from the US Department of Transportation University
Transportation Centers Program and the AARP.



APPENDIX


Table A1. Variable: Confidence in driving skills




Variable          Item Wording                                                                   Response Options     M (SD)

Confidence in     How confident do you feel about your ability to do each of the following?      From 1 (not at all   4.39 (0.62)
driving skills                                                                                   confident) to 5 (very
                  -  React quickly to a change in the environment by steering to avoid a crash   confident)

                  -  Maintain driving at the speed of traffic while traveling on a highway

                  -  Scan an intersection to make sure that it is safe to drive through it

                  -  Reverse a vehicle in a straight line

                  -  While driving in traffic, change into a right-hand lane

                  -  React quickly to a change in the environment by braking suddenly

                  -  Parallel park between two vehicles

                  -  While driving in traffic, change into a left-hand lane

                  -  Physically turn around to reverse a vehicle

                  D = .88







Table A2. Correlations of all variables




                              1        2     3 4 5 6 7                                           8 9 10               11

1   Self-reported knowledge of
    self-driving cars

2   Experience with advanced
    vehicle technologies      .42**

3   Years as a driver         -.31**   -.35**





This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

4   Driving frequency               .15**    .21**    -.15**

5   Positive affect - enjoyment     .26**    .46**    -.14**   .17**

6   Positive affect - control       0.01     -0.03    .17**    -0.03    .31**

7   Negative affect                 .22**    .29**    -.38**   0.03     .14**   -.20**

8   Risk perception                 -.09**   -.10**   .07**    -0.005   -0.01   .07**    0.02

9   Benefit perception              .37**    .35**    -.30**   .09**    .25**   -.06*    .22**    -.46**

10  Trust in self-driving cars      .38**    .43**    -.28**   .13**    .27**   -0.05    .21**    -.49**   .64**

11  Interest in self-driving cars   .45**    .43**    -.39**   .11**    .28**   -.08**   .28**    -.44**   .80**    .69**

12  Confidence in driving skills    .06*     0.05     .21**    .14**    .18**   .38**    -.31**   .08**    -.08**   -0.03 -.08**




*p < .05, **p < .01.

N = 1484










REFERENCES

Abdu, R., Shinar, D., & Meiran, N. (2012). Situational (state) anger and driving. Transportation
 Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 15(5), 575–580.
 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2012.05.007

Abraham, H., Lee, C., Brady, S., Fitzgerald, C., Mehler, B., Reimer, B., & Coughlin, J. F. (2016).
 Autonomous Vehicles, Trust, and Driving Alternatives: A survey of consumer preferences. White
 Paper. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Abraham, H., Reimer, B., Seppelt, B. D., Fitzgerald, C., Mehler, B., & Coughlin, J. F. (2018). Consumer
 Interest in Automation: Change Over One Year. Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research
 Board, Washington, D.C.






This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Alhakami, A. S., & Slovic, P. (1994). A Psychological Study of the Inverse Relationship Between
    Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit. Risk Analysis, 14(6), 1085–1096.
    http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.1994.tb00080.x

Anstey, K. J., & Wood, J. (2011). Chronological age and age-related cognitive deficits are associated
    with an increase in multiple types of driving errors in late life. Neuropsychology, 25(5), 613–621.
    http://doi.org/10.1037/a0023835

Balfe, N., Sharples, S., & Wilson, J. R. (2018). Understanding Is Key: An Analysis of Factors Pertaining
    to Trust in a Real-World Automation System. Human Factors, 60(4), 477–495.
    http://doi.org/10.1177/0018720818761256

Bansal, P., & Kockelman, K. M. (2016). Are we ready to embrace connected and self-driving vehicles?
    A case study of Texans. Transportation, 45(2), 641–675. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-016-
    9745-z

Bansal, P., Kockelman, K. M., & Singh, A. (2016). Assessing public opinions of and interest in new
    vehicle technologies: An Austin perspective. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
    Technologies, 67, 1–14. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.019

Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good.
    Review of General Psychology, 5(4), 323–370.

Bearth, A., & Siegrist, M. (2016). Are risk or benefit perceptions more important for public
    acceptance of innovative food technologies: A meta-analysis. Trends in Food Science &
    Technology, 49, 14–23. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2016.01.003

Berdoulat, E., Vavassori, D., & Sastre, M. T. M. (2013). Driving anger, emotional and instrumental
    aggressiveness, and impulsiveness in the prediction of aggressive and transgressive driving.
    Accident Analysis & Prevention, 50, 758–767. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.06.029

Borchers, T. A. (2013). Persuasion in the Media Age (3rd ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.

Bureau of Transportation Statistics. (2017). Passenger Travel. Retrieved August 23, 2017, from
    https://www.bts.gov/topics/passenger-travel

Cabanac, M. (1992). Pleasure: the common currency. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 155(2), 173–
    200.

Center for Disease Control. (2016, March). Older Drivers in the Workplace: How Employers and
    Workers Can Prevent Crashes. Retrieved May 9, 2017, from
    https://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/older_adult_drivers/

Chauvin, B. (2018). Individual Differences in the Judgment of Risks: Sociodemographic
    characteristics, Cultural orientation, and Level of expertise. In M. Raue, E. Lermer, & B. Streicher
    (Eds.), Psychological Perspectives on Risk and Risk Analysis - Theory, Models and Applications.
    New York, NY.

Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (2016). Consequences of Automatic Evaluation: Immediate Behavioral
    Predispositions to Approach or Avoid the Stimulus. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
    25(2), 215–224. http://doi.org/10.1177/0146167299025002007


    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Chihuri, S., Mielenz, T. J., DiMaggio, C. J., Betz, M. E., DiGuiseppi, C., Jones, V. C., & Li, G. (2016).
    Driving Cessation and Health Outcomes in Older Adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics
    Society, 64(2), 332–341. http://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.13931

Choi, J. K., & Ji, Y. G. (2015). Investigating the Importance of Trust on Adopting an Autonomous
    Vehicle. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 31(10), 692–702.
    http://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2015.1070549

Cousin, M.-E., & Siegrist, M. (2010). The public's knowledge of mobile communication and its
    influence on base station siting preferences. Health, Risk & Society, 12(3), 231–250.
    http://doi.org/10.1080/13698571003710332

Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User Acceptance of Computer Technology: A
    Comparison of Two Theoretical Models. Management Science, 35(8), 982–1003.
    http://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982

Dingus, T. A., Guo, F., Lee, S., Antin, J. F., Perez, M., Buchanan-King, M., & Hankey, J. (2016). Driver
    crash risk factors and prevalence evaluation using naturalistic driving data. Proceedings of the
    National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(10), 2636–2641.
    http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1513271113

Donorfio, L. K. M., D'Ambrosio, L. A., Coughlin, J. F., & Mohyde, M. (2009). To drive or not to drive,
    that isn't the question—the meaning of self-regulation among older drivers. Journal of Safety
    Research, 40(3), 221–226. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsr.2009.04.002

Faraji-Rad, A., & Pham, M. T. (2017). Uncertainty Increases the Reliance on Affect in Decisions.
    Journal of Consumer Research, 44. http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2715333

Federal Highway Administration. (2015). Highway Statistics 2015. Retrieved August 23, 2017, from
    https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2015/dv1c.cfm

Finucane, M. L., Alhakami, A., Slovic, P., & Johnson, S. M. (2000). The Affect Heuristic in Judgments of
    Risks and Benefits. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13, 1–17.

Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., Read, S., & Combs, B. (1978). How safe is safe enough? A
    psychometric study of attitudes towards technological risks and benefits. Policy Sciences, 9(2),
    127–152.

Forgas, J. P. (1995). Mood and judgment: The affect infusion model (AIM). Psychological Bulletin,
    117(1), 39–66. http://doi.org/10.1037//0033-2909.117.1.39

Fox-Glassman, K. T., & Weber, E. U. (2016). What makes risk acceptable? Revisiting the 1978
    psychological dimensions of perceptions of technological risks. Journal of Mathematical
    Psychology, 75, 157–169. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2016.05.003

Frewer, L. J., Howard, C., & Shepherd, R. (1995). Genetic engineering and food: what determines
    consumer acceptance? British Food Journal, 97(8), 31–36.
    http://doi.org/10.1108/00070709510100118






    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Goidel, R. K., & Langley, R. E. (1995). Media Coverage of the Economy and Aggregate Economic
    Evaluations: Uncovering Evidence of Indirect Media Effects. Political Research Quarterly, 48(2),
    313–328. http://doi.org/10.1177/106591299504800205

Hengstler, M., Enkel, E., & Duelli, S. (2016). Applied artificial intelligence and trust—The case of
    autonomous vehicles and medical assistance devices. Technological Forecasting and Social
    Change, 105, 105–120. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.12.014

Hirshleifer, D., & Shumway, T. (2003). Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather. The
    Journal of Finance, 58(3), 1009–1032. http://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6261.00556

Hohenberger, C., Spörrle, M., & Welpe, I. M. (2016). How and why do men and women differ in their
    willingness to use automated cars? The influence of emotions across different age groups.
    Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 94, 374–385.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2016.09.022

Howard, D., & Dai, D. (2013). Public Perceptions of Self-driving Cars: The Case of Berkeley, California.
    93rd Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board.

Hulse, L. M., Xie, H., & Galea, E. R. (2018). Perceptions of autonomous vehicles: Relationships with
    road users, risk, gender and age. Safety Science, 102, 1–13.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2017.10.001

Isen, A. M. (2000). Some perspectives on positive affect and self-regulation. MIS Quarterly, 11(3),
    184–187. http://doi.org/10.2307/1449800

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist, 39(4), 341–
    350. http://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.39.4.341

Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1991). Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aversion,
    and status quo bias. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 193–206.

König, M., & Neumayr, L. (2017). Users’ resistance towards radical innovations: The case of the self-
    driving car. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 44, 42–52.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2016.10.013

Kyriakidis, M., Happee, R., & de Winter, J. C. F. (2015). Public opinion on automated driving: Results
    of an international questionnaire among 5000 respondents. Transportation Research Part F:
    Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 32, 127–140. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2015.04.014

Lara, E. R., Pascual, C. O., Borondo, J. P., & Pino, G. (2016). Nanoimplants that Enhance Human
    Capabilities: A Cognitive‐Affective Approach to Assess Individuals’ Acceptance of this
    Controversial Technology. Psychology & Marketing, 33(9), 704–712.
    http://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20911

Lee, C., & Coughlin, J. F. (2015). Older Adults' Adoption of Technology: An Integrated Approach to
    Identifying Determinants and Barriers. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 32(5), 747–
    759. http://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12176






    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Lee, C., Seppelt, B. D., Abraham, H., Reimer, B., Mehler, B., & Coughlin, J. F. (2018). Consumer
    Comfort with In-Vehicle Automation: Technology of Today Drives Acceptance of a Self-Driving
    Future. White Paper. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Lee, C., Ward, C., Raue, M., D'Ambrosio, L., & Coughlin, J. F. (2017). Age Differences in Acceptance of
    Self-driving Cars: A Survey of Perceptions and Attitudes. In J. Zhou & Salvendy, G. (Eds.). Human
    Aspects of IT for the Aged Population. Aging, Design and User Experience (4 ed., Vol. 10297, pp.
    3–13). Cham: Springer. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-58530-7_1

Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. (2004). Trust in Automation: Designing for Appropriate Reliance. Human
    Factors, 46(1), 50–80. http://doi.org/10.1518/hfes.46.1.50_30392

Lee, M.-C. (2009). Factors influencing the adoption of internet banking: An integration of TAM and
    TPB with perceived risk and perceived benefit. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications,
    8(3), 130–141. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2008.11.006

Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2001). Fear, anger, and risk. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.

Lerner, J. S., Li, Y., Valdesolo, P., & Kassam, K. S. (2015). Emotion and Decision Making. Annual
    Review of Psychology, 66(1), 799–823. http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115043

Loewenstein, G., & Lerner, J. S. (2003). The Role of Affect in Decision Making. In R. Davidson, H.
    Goldsmith, & K. Scherer (Eds.), Handbook of Affective Science (pp. 619–642). Oxford, UK: Oxford
    University Press.

Luo, X., Li, H., Zhang, J., & Shim, J. P. (2010). Examining multi-dimensional trust and multi-faceted
    risk in initial acceptance of emerging technologies: An empirical study of mobile banking
    services. Decision Support Systems, 49(2), 222–234. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2010.02.008

Marottoli, R. A., Leon, C. F. M., Glass, T. A., Williams, C. S., Cooney, L. M., Berkman, L. F., & Tinetti, M.
    E. (1997). Driving Cessation and Increased Depressive Symptoms: Prospective Evidence from the
    New Haven EPESE. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 45(2), 202–206.
    http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.1997.tb04508.x

National Highway Safety Administration. (2015). Critical Reasons for Crashes Investigated in the
    National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation Survey. Retrieved August 3, 2017, from
    https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812115

National Highway Safety Traffic Administration. (2017). 2016 Fatal Motor Vehicle Crashes: Overview.
    Retrieved October 2, 2018, from https://www.nhtsa.gov/press-releases/usdot-releases-2016-
    fatal-traffic-crash-data

Nielsen, T. A. S., & Haustein, S. (2018). On sceptics and enthusiasts: What are the expectations
    towards self-driving cars? Transport Policy, 66, 49–55.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.03.004

Pelegrín-Borondo, J., Reinares-Lara, E., & Olarte-Pascual, C. (2017). Assessing the acceptance of
    technological implants (the cyborg): Evidences and challenges. Computers in Human Behavior,
    70, 104–112. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.12.063





    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Gärling, T., & Slovic, P. (2006). Affect and decision making: A “hot” topic.
    Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 79–85.

Raue, M., & Scholl, S. G. (2018). The Use of Heuristics in Decision-Making under Risk and
    Uncertainty. In M. Raue, E. Lermer, & B. Streicher (Eds.), Psychological Perspectives on Risk and
    Risk Analysis - Theory, Models and Applications. New York, NY: Springer.

Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Strayer, D. L., Yu, Z., Biondi, F., & Cooper, J. M. (2018). Cognitive underpinnings
    of beliefs and confidence in beliefs about fully automated vehicles. Transportation Research
    Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 55, 114–122. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.02.029

Schoettle, B., & Sivak, M. (2014). A survey of public opinion about autonomous and self-driving
    vehicles in the U.S., the U.K., and Australia. The University of Michigan Transportation Research
    Institute, Report No. UMTRI-2014-21.

Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions of affective
    states. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of Motivation and Cognition
    Foundations of Social Behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 527–561). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Schwarz, N. (2012). Feelings-as-information theory. In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins
    (Eds.), Handbook of Theories of Social Psychology (pp. 289–308). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (1983). Mood, misattribution, and judgments of well-being: Informative
    and directive functions of affective states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(3),
    513–523.

Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (2003). Mood as Information: 20 Years Later. Psychological Inquiry, 14(3-
    4), 296–303. http://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2003.9682896

Shabanpour, R., Golshani, N., Shamshiripour, A., & Mohammadian, A. K. (2018). Eliciting preferences
    for adoption of fully automated vehicles using best-worst analysis. Transportation Research Part
    C: Emerging Technologies, 93, 463–478. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2018.06.014

Siegrist, M. (1999). A Causal Model Explaining the Perception and Acceptance of Gene Technology.
    Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29(10), 2093–2106. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-
    1816.1999.tb02297.x

Siegrist, M. (2000). The Influence of Trust and Perceptions of Risks and Benefits on the Acceptance of
    Gene Technology. Risk Analysis, 20(2), 195–204. http://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.202020

Siegrist, M., & Cvetkovich, G. (2000). Perception of Hazards: The Role of Social Trust and Knowledge.
    Risk Analysis, 20(5), 713–720. http://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.205064

Siegrist, M., Cousin, M.-E., Kastenholz, H., & Wiek, A. (2007). Public acceptance of nanotechnology
    foods and food packaging: The influence of affect and trust. Appetite, 49(2), 459–466.
    http://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2007.03.002

Siegrist, M., Cvetkovich, G., & Roth, C. (2000). Salient Value Similarity, Social Trust, and Risk/Benefit
    Perception. Risk Analysis, 20(3), 353–362. http://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.203034





    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Siegrist, M., Earle, T. C., & Gutscher, H. (2003). Test of a Trust and Confidence Model in the Applied
    Context of Electromagnetic Field (EMF) Risks. Risk Analysis, 23(4), 705–716.
    http://doi.org/10.1111/1539-6924.00349

Slovic, P. (1987). Perception of Risk. Science, 236(4799), 280–285.
    http://doi.org/10.1126/science.3563507

Slovic, P. (1999). Trust, Emotion, Sex, Politics, and Science: Surveying the Risk‐Assessment
    Battlefield. Risk Analysis, 19(4), 689–701. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.1999.tb00439.x

Slovic, P. (2015). Understanding Perceived Risk: 1978–2015. Environment: Science and Policy for
    Sustainable Development, 58(1), 25–29. http://doi.org/10.1080/00139157.2016.1112169

Slovic, P., & Peters, E. (2006). Risk Perception and Affect. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
    15(6), 322–325. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2006.00461.x

Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G. (2004). Risk as analysis and risk as feelings:
    Some thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality. Risk Analysis, 24(2), 311–322.

Slovic, P., Finucane, M., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G. (2003). The Affect Heuristic. In T. Gilovich, D.
    Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (pp.
    1–51). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Sokolowska, J., & Sleboda, P. (2015). The Inverse Relation Between Risks and Benefits: The Role of
    Affect and Expertise. Risk Analysis, 35(7), 1252–1267. http://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12346

Srull, T. K. (1984). The Effects of Subjective Affective States on Memory and Judgment. In T. Kinnear
    (Ed.), Advances in Consumer Research (Vol. 11, pp. 530–533). Provo, UT: ACR North American
    Advances.

Tompkins, M. K., Bjälkebring, P., & Peters, E. (2018). Emotional Aspects of Risk Perceptions. In M.
    Raue, E. Lermer, & B. Streicher (Eds.), Psychological Perspectives on Risk and Risk Analysis -
    Theory, Models and Applications. New York, NY: Springer.

Turner, M., Love, S., & Howell, M. (2008). Understanding emotions experienced when using a mobile
    phone in public: The social usability of mobile (cellular) telephones. Telematics and Informatics,
    25(3), 201–215. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2007.03.001

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science,
    185, 1124–1131.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science,
    211(4481), 453–458.

Vanderbilt, T. (2008). Traffic: Why We Drive the Way We Do (and What It Says About Us). New York,
    NY: Random House.

Venkatesh, V., Thong, J. Y. L., & Xu, X. (2012). Consumer acceptance and use of information
    technology: extending the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology. MIS Quarterly,
    36(1), 157–178. http://doi.org/10.2307/41410412




    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Visschers, V. H. M., & Siegrist, M. (2018). Differences in risk perception between hazards and
    between individuals. In M. Raue, E. Lermer, & B. Streicher (Eds.), Psychological Perspectives on
    Risk and Risk Analysis - Theory, Models and Applications. New York, NY: Springer.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of
    positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
    54(6), 1063.

World Health Organization. (2016). Road traffic injuries. Retrieved August 3, 2017, from
    http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en/

Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American Psychologist,
    35(2), 151–175. http://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.35.2.151

Zmud, J., Sener, I. N., & Wagner, J. (2016). Revolutionizing Our Roadways: Consumer Acceptance and
    Travel Behavior Impacts of Automated Vehicles. Texas A&M Transportation Institute.










    This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

