    42    — doi 10.2478 / nimmir-2019-0015










The Thorny Challenge of Making
Moral Machines: Ethical Dilemmas
with Self-Driving Cars

Edmond Awad, Jean-François Bonnefon, Azim Shariff and Iyad Rahwan






Self-driving vehicles: Safe, but not 100%    Autonomous, K E Y WO RDS
self-driving cars are being tested and trained extensively and Ethics, Decision Making,
have already covered thousands of miles of real road driving. AI, Autonomous Vehicles,
Incidents are remarkably rare. However, any accidents – Moral Machines
especially if they involve fatalities – are covered broadly in
media all over the world, and consumers wonder whether T HE  AU T H O R S
autonomous vehicles (AVs) are actually safe, and whether Edmond Awad
they should ever trust them. Experts agree that AVs do The Media Lab, Institute for Data,
have the potential to benefit the world by increasing traffic  Systems and Society,
efficiency, reducing pollution and eliminating up to 90 % Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
of traffic accidents – those that are caused by driver error,  Cambridge, MA, USA
tiredness, drunkenness or other human factors. Though  awad@mit.edu
safety is constantly improving and injuries and deaths might
be significantly reduced, crashes will never be completely Jean-François Bonnefon
avoidable. And any imminent crashes will require AVs to Toulouse School of Economics (TSM-R, CNRS),
make difficult decisions. Université Toulouse-1 Capitole,
        Toulouse, France
How to react when a crash is imminent?     Imagine, as jean-francois.bonnefon@tse-fr.eu
an example, situations as depicted in Figure 1. The AV may
avoid harming several pedestrians by swerving and sacrific- Azim Shariff
ing a passerby (A), or the AV may be faced with the choice Department of Psychology,
of sacrificing its own passenger to save one (B) or more (C) University of British Columbia,
pedestrians. Vancouver, Canada
        Canadashariff@psych.ubc.ca
Although these scenarios appear unlikely, even low-proba -
bility events are bound to occur with millions of AVs on the Iyad Rahwan
road. Furthermore, the tradeoffs involved in these scenarios The Media Lab,
will occur in much more frequent, but less extreme scenarios: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
instead of choosing between certain death, the car will need Cambridge, MA, USA,
to choose between slightly increasing the risk toward one Center for Humans and Machines,
group rather than toward another. AV programming must Max-Planck Institute for Human Development,
include decision rules about what to do when these situations Berlin, Germany
occur. While a human driver has to spontaneously react in a irahwan@mit.edu

                                                                                  43
    Moral Machines    Vol. 11, No. 2, 2019    NIM Marketing Intelligence Review   43










    —_—


    al







    NZ


    \\/                          Tr
                                   -
          J    |        J          -
    VERN            |        Ty    |        7 A
    NA              ~
    / NL            I_       |          a      we
    EN              |                       ft
    NZ
     rd                      i”         id       z

    N         ya        JN
      \   /         _ I      1

                    aad
    \\    /         |      |




    ZN                 Figuring out how to build
    NS                 ethical autonomous machines
    ’ ><               is one of the thorniest challenges
                       in artificial intelligence today.

    N/      N/ N/  \/        \/   \/  \/ \/
pz N J Ne 4 AN J AN / / AN / Ne / / AN PAN

    44 NIM Marketing Intelligence Review    Vol. 11, No. 2, 2019    Moral Machines










    FIGURE 1    Three traffic situations involving imminent unavoidable harm

    The car must decide between:


 Killing several  Killing one  Killing several
  pedestrians  pedestrian  pedestrians
or one passerby or its own passenger or its own passenger
       A  B  C










split second, an autonomous vehicle needs to be programmed Saving passengers or pedestrians?    Another online
deliberately; someone needs to define the rules, well before study among U.S. residents sheds more light on the com -
AVs become a global commodity. The algorithms that control plexity of the topic of AI-driven decision-making in danger -
AVs will need to embed moral principles guiding their deci - ous situations. This study explored the trade-off between
sions in situations of unavoidable harm. But what is the right saving driver and passengers versus saving pedestrians
moral decision in such a case? How should AI be programmed and other road users – the dilemma illustrated in Figure 1.
to react in such an instant? Manufacturers and regulators will In principle, participants approved of utilitarian AVs mini -
need to accomplish three potentially incompatible objectives: mizing the number of casualties. Their moral approval
consistency, avoiding public outrage, and not discouraging increased with the number of lives that could be saved.
buyers. One step toward solving this problem is trying to Participants’ approval of passenger sacrifice was even
learn how people feel about alternative decisions that self- slightly positive when they had to imagine themselves and
driving vehicles’ AI might have to make. This was the purpose another person, particularly a family member, in the AV.
of our Moral Machine study (see Box 1).

    Moral Machines    Vol. 11, No. 2, 2019    NIM Marketing Intelligence Review 45










B OX 1

Exploring moral preferences – the moral machine experiment

With a group of MIT researchers we set out to gauge societal expectations about the ethical principles that should
guide machine behavior. To address this challenge, we deployed the Moral Machine, a viral online experimental plat-
form designed to explore the moral dilemmas faced by autonomous vehicles. This platform gathered 40 million de-
cisions in the context of unavoidable accidents. More than two million people from 233 countries and territories
participated online in our multilingual ‘serious game’ and revealed which harm seemed more tolerable to most people.
Indeed, the most emphatic global preferences in the survey are for sparing the lives of humans over the lives of other
animals; sparing the lives of many people rather than a few; and preserving the lives of the young, rather than older
people (see the first three preferences in Figure 2).





    FIGURE 2    Global preferences in favour of the choice on the right side





        Sparing pets Sparing humans

Sparing fewer persons 1 2 3 4 Sparing more persons

   Sparing the elderly Sparing the young

  Sparing the unlawful Sparing the lawful

  Sparing lower status Sparing higher status

     Sparing the large Sparing the fit

        Sparing males Sparing females

   Sparing passengers Sparing pedestrians

 Preference for action Preference for inaction

        No change + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.8

        P

  P is the difference between the probability of sparing persons possessing the attribute on the right, and the
 probability of sparing persons possessing the attribute on the left, aggregated over all other attributes. For the
 number of persons effect sizes are shown for each number of additional characters (1 to 4); the effect size for
 two additional persons overlaps with the mean effect of the attribute (= blue circle).

    46 NIM Marketing Intelligence Review    Vol. 11, No. 2, 2019    Moral Machines










    B OX 2

    Cultural differences in the preference for ethical standards

    While there was not much variation along the lines of demographic characteristics like age, gender, income, education,
    or political and religious views, the cultural background did play a role in the assessment. Some of the differences are
    listed below:


       Countries within close proximity to one another showed closer moral preferences, with three dominant
     clusters in the West, East, and South.

        Participants from collectivist, eastern cultures like China and Japan were less likely to spare the young
     over the old compared to countries in the southern cluster in which central and southern American
     countries dominate.

        Participants from individualistic cultures, like the UK and US, placed a stronger emphasis on sparing
     more lives given all the other choices – possibly, because of the greater emphasis on the value of each
     individual.

        Similarly, participants from poorer countries with weaker institutions turned out to be more tolerant of
     jaywalkers versus pedestrians who cross legally.

        Participants from countries with a high level of economic inequality showed greater gaps between the
     treatment of individuals with high and low social status.

        Finally, we observed some striking peculiarities, such as the strong preference for sparing women and
     the strong preference for sparing fit characters in the Southern cluster.




Consumers would like other people to buy AVs relying on such   Discuss ethics of AI on a general level    All stakehold-
a utilitarian algorithm, but they would themselves prefer to ers should embrace the challenges of machine ethics as
ride in AVs that protect their passengers at all costs. Further, a unique opportunity to decide, as a community, what
study participants disapproved of enforcing utilitarian regu- we believe to be right or wrong, and to make sure that
lations for AVs, and would be less willing to buy such AVs. machines, unlike humans, unerringly follow the agreed-
Thus, the moral dilemma triggers a social dilemma that needs upon moral preferences. We might not reach universal
to be solved. agreement, as indicated by the Moral Machine survey, but
        the fact that broad regions of the world displayed relative
Steps towards solving the ethical dilemma of self- agreement is encouraging.
driving vehicles    We find ourselves in a situation that is
new to the world: Vehicles are able to make decisions as far-   Work on a new social contract    Over a century ago,
reaching as who should live or die – without real-time human cars started to become a commodity on the roads. A
supervision. This problem is not limited to a niche market system of laws regulating the behavior of drivers and
but will affect everyday transportation and all road users, pedestrians (and the designs and practices of manu -
no matter whether they drive, walk, or ride a bike. To be pre- facturers) was introduced and has been continuously
pared to actually let AVs take over our roads, producers need refined. Overall, this traffic system is trusted by society.
to master several challenges on top of the technical ones.  In days to come, the integration of autonomous cars will

Moral Machines    Vol. 11, No. 2, 2019    NIM Marketing Intelligence Review 47










   require a new social contract that provides clear guidelines      the field of experimental ethics can provide key insights
   on who bears responsibility for different kinds of accidents;     into the moral, cultural, and legal standards that people
   how monitoring and enforcement will be performed; and             expect from algorithms of self-driving cars. And even if
   how trust can be engendered among all stakeholders. This          these issues are being tackled and will eventually be solved,
   contract will be similarly transformational, but will prob -      other AV challenges such as hacking, liability, and labor
   ably occur over a much shorter period of time.                    displacement will remain. We face interesting times!

   Prepare    the public to build trust         The ethical quan-
   dary of who to save in life-threatening incidents pro        -
   duces a social dilemma. People recognize the utilitarian
   approach to be the more ethical one, and as citizens, they
   want the cars to save a greater number of lives. But as
   consumers, they want self-protective cars. As a result,
   the adoption of either strategy brings its own risks for
   manufacturers: A self-protective strategy risks public out-        FUR T HER RE ADING
   rage, whereas a utilitarian strategy may scare consumers
   away. To make people feel safe and trust AVs, we must              Awad, E.; Dsouza, S.; Kim, R.; Schulz, J.; Henrich, J.;
   encourage public discourse about the absolute reduction            Shariff, A.; Bonnefon, J.K. and Rahwan, I. (2018):
                                                                      “The Moral Machine Experiment”, Nature. 563.
   in risk to passengers through overall accident reduction.          doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0637-6.
   Otherwise, outsized media coverage of rare accidents will          Bonnefon, J.- F.; Shariff, A. and Rahwan, I. (2016):
   trigger the biased perception of risk for passengers, which        “The Social Dilemma of Autonomous Vehicles”, Science.
   might irrationally overshadow the greater safety effects.          352. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf2654.

Interesting times ahead      Figuring out how to build                Bonnefon J.- F.; Shariff A. and Rahwan, I. (2019):
                                                                      “The trolley, the bull bar, and why engineers should
ethical autonomous machines is one of the thorniest chal -            care about the ethics of autonomous cars“,
lenges in artificial intelligence today. As we are about to           Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 107, 502-504.
endow millions of vehicles with decision autonomy, seri         -     Shariff, A.; Bonnefon, J.- F. and Rahwan, I. (2017):
ous consideration of algorithmic morality has never been              “Psychological roadblocks to the adoption of
                                                                      self-driving vehicles”, Nature Human Behaviour
more urgent. Our data-driven approach highlights how                  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-017-0202-6

