              Augmenting Anomaly Detection for Autonomous
                      Vehicles With Symbolic Rules
                                   by
                              Tianye Chen
   Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
                                Science
      in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
  Master of Engineering in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                                 at the
                 MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
                               June 2019
   c Tianye Chen, MMXIX. All rights reserved.
   ○
     The author hereby grants to MIT permission to reproduce and to
distribute publicly paper and electronic copies of this thesis document
   in whole or in part in any medium now known or hereafter created.




    Author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                             Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                                                                                                                          May 24, 2019

      Certified by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                                                          Lalana Kagal
                                                                                                          Principal Research Scientist
                                                                                                                     Thesis Supervisor

    Accepted by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                                                       Katrina LaCurts
                                                                                     Chairman, Masters of Engineering Thesis Committee

2

  Augmenting Anomaly Detection for Autonomous Vehicles
        With Symbolic Rules
        by
        Tianye Chen

   Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
        on May 24, 2019, in partial fulfillment of the
        requirements for the degree of
       Master of Engineering in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

Abstract
   My research investigates the issues in anomaly detection as applied to autonomous
driving created by the incompleteness of training data. I address these issues through
the use of a commonsense knowledge base, a predefined set of rules regarding driving
behavior, and a means of updating the base set of rules as anomalies are detected.
In order to explore this problem I have built a hardware platform that was used to
evaluate existing anomaly detection developed within the lab and that will serve as
an evaluation platform for future work in this area. The platform is based on the
open-source MIT RACECAR project that integrates the most basic aspect of an
driving autonomous vehicle – lidar, camera, accelerometer, and computer – onto the
frame of an RC car. We created a set of rules regarding traffic light color transitions
to test the car’s ability to navigate cones (which represent traffic light colors) and
detect anomalies in the traffic light transition order. Anomalies regularly occurred in
the car’s driving environment and its driving rules were updated as a consequence of
the logged anomalies. The car was able to successfully navigate the course and the
rules (plausible traffic light color transitions) were updated when repeated anomalies
were seen.

Thesis Supervisor: Lalana Kagal
Title: Principal Research Scientist










    3

4

Acknowledgments

   I would like to thank my advisor Lalana Kagal and PhD students Leilani Gilpin
and Ben Yuan for their continued advice and support on this project.










    5

6

 Contents




 1  Introduction               13

 2  Related Work               17
2.1 Training data gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2 Association rule learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3 Reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4 Diagnostic systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5 Adversarial attacks and security applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.6 Overview of related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

 3  System Design        23
3.1 RACECAR architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     3.1.1 Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     3.1.2 Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     3.1.3 Path planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     3.1.4 Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2 Commonsense monitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3 Driving rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4 Updating rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

 4  Evaluation and Results     35
4.1 Testing setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

        7

    4.2.1 Anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

 5  Conclusion           43
5.1 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

 A Example Error Logs    49










    8

    List of Figures



    2-1   Noise is generated for each pixel with respect to the underlying gradient
          for the pixel in the model. The network believes the altered image is a
          gibbon when it looks the same as the unaltered image to the human
          eye [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20

2-2 Stop sign and its modifications [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

3-1 The fully assembled RACECAR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

    3-2   The map of a section of the basement of MIT’s Ray and Maria Stata
          Center. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

    3-3   We are looking for the horizontal angle that the cone makes with the
          camera; we are looking for the angle 𝛽.             The distance between the
          cone and the center of the image (𝑏) is averaged between the two left
          and right images. The angle 𝛽 can be calculated by the following equation:

           2𝑏
          𝛽 = 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛( 𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛼))

          . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26

    3-4   The distance the cone is from the car can be calculated by using parallax
          property of the left and right images. we want to solve for the distance 𝑧.

          𝑧 = 𝑥𝐵𝑓
           − 𝑥′

     The term 𝐵𝑓 was determined empirically through linear regression. . 27

          9

3-5 Waypoints picked around the basement connected with a straight line
     path. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3-6 Cone path construction process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3-7 Rviz shows that the lidar points matches the map (the rainbow points),
     the location of the green cone seen, and the path planned around the
     green cone. The set of red arrows show the estimation of the car’s pose. 29
3-8 Symbolic breakdown of sentences of scene descriptions and their respec-
     tive reasonableness [13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3-9 Computer architecture for autonomous driving [18] . . . . . . . . . . 31

4-1 Cone setup in the basement of MIT’s Stata building . . . . . . . . . . 41










    10

    List of Tables



4.1 The five chosen sequences of traffic lights without transition errors . . 38
4.2 The five chosen sequences of traffic lights with some random transition
     errors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.3 The five chosen sequences of traffic lights with repeating transition errors. 40










    11

12

    Chapter 1

    Introduction



   The autonomous driving space has dramatically expanded over the last fifteen
years. In 2004, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) announced
the first Grand Challenge [6] where one million dollars would be awarded to the team
that can build a car that could autonomously navigate a rugged desert course. None
of the fifteen finalists could finish the course. Waymo, a leading self driving company
that grew out of a team of engineers who participated in the original DARPA Grand
Challenge, debuted its first self driving taxi service in Arizona [9] fourteen years later.
   Two popular autonomous driving methods that are currently being explored are
behavioral reflex and mediated perception. Behavioral reflex maps sensor data directly
to a driving output [15] whereas mediated perception parses the entire scene into
discrete components before making a driving decision [15]. Both approaches make
use of machine learning techniques, which are opaque in their decision making, in the
intermediary stages between input and output. Due to the uninterpretable nature of
the space between the input and the output of the network, the decisions made by
the network are often difficult to understand or explain.
   Autonomous driving systems are not error free and decisions are usually made
with models that were formed based on training data. Driving is a complex task,
and corner cases lack the large volume of training data necessary for models to make
the correct decision based on input. Instead of exhausting all possibilities for driving
corner cases, I propose that the autonomous system can evaluate a new situation

        13

using two components - commonsense and a set of driving rules - and then explain
its decision based on this information. Analogous to how humans approach a new
situation, the autonomous vehicle would make a decision using prior knowledge and
applicable driving rules. Those driving rules can then be updated as the car witnesses
new situations.

   It is common to use training data based models within self-driving solutions.
Machine learning techniques lend themselves to identify and classify scenes and actions
similar to ones they have already seen. Perception networks are trained to recognize
familiar situations since the classifier itself is dependent on the training data used
to create it. Pattern recognition and general classification can typically guide the
car to a reasonable decision during normal driving situations. However, driving is
a complex task and it is difficult to capture every single possible situation a driver
may face when they are on the road. In unpredictable situations, a classification error
made by a (neural network, machine learning agent, ...) can potentially cost a human
life [7]. In Uber’s fatal accident with a pedestrian walking her bike across the street
[7], the car had trouble classifying Elaine Herzberg as a pedestrian. The autonomous
system initially classified her as a car, then a bicycle, before ultimately classifying her
as a pedestrian too late [5]. The uncertainty in the classification could be detected as
an anomaly by a commonsense rule base since it is not reasonable for an object to
morph from a car to a bike to a human. The accident might have been avoided had
there been a commonsense knowledge base in place to recognize that the situation
was abnormal and could have alerted the car earlier to take the appropriate safety
measures.

   When the vehicle makes a decision on unfamiliar data based on previous data,
the conclusion it reaches can often be unreasonable. For example, an AI recently
interpreted a face on the side of a bus as a person jaywalking [1]. If a human were to
see the bus crossing the intersection, it would not think that the advertisement on the
side of the bus is breaking the law by jaywalking. The AI lacks the common sense
that we humans have in discerning what is reasonable and what is not.

   I propose that the information gap created by the incompleteness of anomalous

        14

training data can be supplemented by commonsense along with a set of rules regarding
appropriate behavior.
   My system, implemented as a monitor around the self driving unit, checks vehicle
data and decisions for expected validity and reasonableness. The decision is reasonable
if follows the rules set and commonsense knowledge base for the autonomous system.
Similarly to how biologists are able to classify newly discovered species using a set
of taxonomy rules, the set of driving rules can be applied to unforeseen situations
that the system has never encountered before and make inferences about what driving
actions are reasonable. As the autonomous vehicle encounters new situations, the set
of driving rules can be updated to reflect acceptable behavior and expected encounters
in the driving world.
   In this thesis, I built a hardware platform based on the open-source MIT RACECAR
[4] project to evaluate anomaly detection and rules updating on real world data as
opposed to simulations and imaginary hard coded situations. I examined how a
symbolic reasoner can most efficiently assist a real autonomous driving system in
detecting anomalies and inconsistencies with driving rules. Along with Leilani Gilpin, I
also developed a mechanism to learn new driving rules from the rate of and similarities
between the anomalies seen.
   The thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 compares and contrasts my work
with related work. In Chapter 3, I detail the system design of the hardware platform I
built to evaluate anomaly detection and rules updating on real world data. The results
of hardware testing and the rule updater are detailed in Chapter 4. The hardware
platform built for this thesis is capable of updating a more complicated rule base with
the utilization of more of the data that is available to the autonomous machine. I
conclude with a summary and future research directions in Chapter 5.










    15

16
  16

    Chapter 2

    Related Work



    In this chapter, I describe existing literature in the area of anomaly detection as
    well as discuss other kinds of applications of anomaly detection.


2.1 Training data gap

   One of our goals is to tackle a limitation with current machine learning techniques,
which is that the trained model can only act predictably on data similar to the data
it was trained on.
   A recent work by Ramakrishnan et. al tackles a similar problem with gaps in
performance when models trained on simulator data is applied to real world scenarios
[20]. The problem is that the training model never encounters some aspects of the
real world in the simulation, such as emergency vehicles, so the the model learns to
ignore aspects of the world that it has never seen. Ramakrishnan et. al’s approach
aims to find blind spots before acting in the real world. The solution is to have the
autonomous system hand off control to a human when it is not confident of the state.
For example, if the autonomous agent has a noisy feature that can predict ambulances
30% of the time, the model learn to transfer control a human when it reaches that
state.
   This approach is dependent on having a human in the loop and tries to anticipate
the uncertainty before it happens whereas my approach aims to catch anomalies

        17

    as they appear in real time. As we move towards fully autonomous vehicles, it is
    important to be able to detect anomalies and respond appropriately to new situations.


2.2 Association rule learning

    In the financial fraud space, there has also been work one in using rules to find
find fraudulent financial transactions. Sarno et al. used a learned set of rules to
detect fraud, which is parallel to finding anomalies in autonomous driving decisions
[21]. Positive and negative association rules are applied to the data which makes each
data entry positively or negatively associated with fraud. The association rules were
generated using an apriori algorithm and expert verification of fraud cases.
    This approach in finding fraud/anomalies in financial transaction data is similar to
my approach in finding anomalies in driving data in which the data is filtered through
a hard set of rules that deems if what autonomous vehicle observed is in accordance
to the rules or not. However, the set of rules used by Sarno et al. is based on training
data which still inherently has the issue of not being able to cover the corner cases of
fraudulent behavior. By using strict driving rules that govern the correct behavior of
vehicle action and govern the world around the car, my system does not rely solely on
training data to detect anomalies. In addition, the set of rules in the fraud study is
created by one set of training data and used on a different set of data to find fraudulent
transactions. Unlike this thesis, the set of rules is ever updated after seeing a new set
of data, where fraud could manifest itself in a different manner.


2.3 Reinforcement learning

   Since autonomous vehicles have been shown to be prone to error [7], it is necessary
to consider safety measures for these autonomous counterparts. One way to make
these systems safer is to have them learn from their mistakes. This yields the decision
of many manufacturers and researchers to use reinforcement learning (RL). In RL,
an autonomous agent is able to process an action, state, and a reward to learn an

        18

optimal policy for future decisions. Good actions receive positive rewards, and bad or
erroneous actions receive negative rewards. This is similar to learning new rules from
anomalous sightings; however, RL can also facilitate human interventions when the
agent is behaving badly by training the model to alert a human in unsafe situations
[22]. Most research and examples are limited to a gaming environment rather than a
real world setting. It has also be shown to be useful in autonomous vehicle negotiation
[23], but without being able to explain how and why they came to specific conclusion.


2.4 Diagnostic systems

   Diagnostic systems have also been explored as a way to mediate abnormal and
critical situations in autonomous systems. This type of diagnostic system has been
applied to underwater vehicles. In autonomous underwater vehicles, the state of the
critical sensors is checked against a knowledge base of known critical situations and
their critical sensor states [16]. The ontology consists of a set of situations each of
which contains an antecedent that sets the conditions of situation execution and a
consequent that sets the actions to be executed if the condition is true. In this case,
the knowledge base and semantic net usage is used to check for proper handling of
critical situations instead of anomaly detection.


2.5 Adversarial attacks and security applications

   An interesting application of anomaly detection, beyond catching mistakes made
by neural networks, is finding unreasonable deductions caused by an adversary with
malicious intent. Adversaries may induce the model to come to an inaccurate but
precise answer.
   Adversaries may be able to manipulate the image so that the neural network
produces an incorrect result even when the image does not appear different to human
eyes. Adding well crafted noise to the image can induce a trained network to give the
wrong prediction [14] (fig. 2-1)

        19

        5
        x +
        &
        “panda” “nematode” “gibbon™ 1
        57.7% confidence 8.2% confidence 99.3 % confidence

Figure 2-1: Noise is generated for each pixel with respect to the underlying gradient
for the pixel in the model. The network believes the altered image is a gibbon when it
looks the same as the unaltered image to the human eye [14]


   One would want the car to come to the same conclusion when processing two
different pictures that appear the same to the human eye. When the autonomous
system comes to a different conclusion than the information presented in the scene,
we would like the autonomous system to realize that its conclusion is unreasonable.
In an automotive application, stop signs augmented with black and white patches
that otherwise looks like graffiti caused the LISA-CNN, which has 91% test accuracy
to misclassify stop signs as a speed limit 45mph sign [10] (Fig. 2-2). However, a
system based on commonsense such as ours would have inferred that is is unlikely and
unreasonable to see a speed limit 45mph sign in a residential intersection, which is
where stop signs normally appear.


Model Physical Dynamics by Sampling  8 3 o
                               oO     *   45
         from Distribution     le) Output
    /    107  fo(z)                       =arget
        p     Stationary + Drive-By Testing


                                          ~
    RP,           Perturbed Stop Sign Under
    Input          Varying Distances/Angles

Figure 2-2: Stop sign and its modifications [10]

                       20

   Another example is the research study published by Tencent Keen labs in regards
to Tesla’s Autopilot system. Tencent placed three inconspicuous stickers on the road
and Autopilot interpreted the stickers as a lane marking and directed the car to drive
onto the opposing traffic lane [3]. For the Autopilot case, it is unreasonable to head
into oncoming traffic, if you see cars approaching from the opposite direction. A
commonsense approach would be to detect the action of heading into oncoming traffic
as an anomaly.


2.6 Overview of related work

   In summary, current approaches to anomaly detection still rely on training data
to create the rules or requires a human in the loop to handle cases when a potential
anomaly occurs. Training data cannot encapsulate all possible cases, and thus the rules
generated from training data cannot successfully classify all inputs. Our approach
begins with a set of concrete rules (in this case, known knowledge of traffic light
transitions) and a commonsense knowledge base and then flags anomalies when the
data does not follow the set of concrete rules. When anomalous behavior is observed
multiple times, the rules updater can then add new rules to the rule base as appropriate.










    21

22

    Chapter 3

    System Design



   This chapter describes the design and architecture of the hardware and software
components I developed.
   The hardware platform I built is based on the open source MIT RACECAR [4]
hardware platform. It has basic perception and motion planning capabilities that can
provide realistic data for the reasonableness monitor and the rule updating component.
The vehicle navigates itself in a clockwise loop around a collection of cones that
represent traffic light colors. In a real world scenario, when we drive on the road
and approach a traffic light, we expect a certain order of light transitions. Lights in
the correct sequence appear in a cycle of green, yellow, then red. The RACECAR
is given a set of rules that define the traffic light patterns and therefore expects the
lights/cones to appear in a certain order. A group of cones represent a single traffic
light pattern while each individual cone represents a color that a car would see at a
traffic light. For example, a single green cone would mean that the car sees a green
light and simply drives through. A group of red and green cones represents a car
pulling into a stop light and then leaving when the light turns green.
   I introduced anomalies in the traffic light patterns by changing the order in which
lights appeared and evaluated whether the reasonableness monitor is able to detect
them. I also used a rule updating framework to add new rules regarding light transition
patterns in the car’s rules knowledge base on traffic light transition expectations and
observed anomalies.

        23

3.1 RACECAR architecture

A Traxxas Slash RC racing car is modified to include a JetsonTX2, a Hoyoku
lidar, a ZED stereo camera, a inertial measurement unit (IMU), and a VESC based
motor controller[8]. ROS Kinetic runs on the JetsonTX2 and is responsible for the
computation and decision making of the car (Fig.3-1).




-

> 9
ol
   3

   =







Figure 3-1: The fully assembled RACECAR.


3.1.1 Localization

The vehicle is given a map of the area it will traverse (Fig.3-2) and localizes itself
within the map using lidar and odometry data. A particle filter uses the Monte Carlo
Localization (MCL) algorithm to utilize the data together with the motion and sensor
model to localize itself within the map.

3.1.2 Vision

A stereo camera on board is used to detect cones and place them on the map
accordingly. The car drives slowly, so the camera images are processed at a rate of
5 Hz. Since the camera is only looking for cones straight ahead, I remove top and
bottom third of the image, as cones could not possibly appear above the ground or be
blocking the car.

    24

    =


|


    FE 4Va
       A
    x|






Figure 3-2: The map of a section of the basement of MIT’s Ray and Maria Stata
Center.

   The image is converted to HSV values and masked using empirically tested red,
green and yellow thresholds to find and locate the cones in the image. If a contour is
found, the distance (fig.3-4) and angle (Fig.3-3)from the car is calculated using the
left and right images of the car.
   The angle, color and distance of the cone is published on a cone topic that the
controller is subscribed to. The image processor always publishes the cone that it sees
even if it has seen it before. It is up to the controller to decide whether the image
processor is seeing a new cone or re-seeing the same old cone.


3.1.3 Path planning

   A Probabilistic Roadmap Method (PRM) path planner is used for path planning
around the map. Initially, waypoints are manually placed on the map starting at
the top left hand corner and proceeding in a clockwise fashion (Fig.3-5). PRM is
used to plan a path from waypoint to waypoint. PRM first randomly generates nodes
across the entire map. I seeded the map with 4000 nodes. Nodes that do not have

        25

    a=w/2       b   Image (width)
    \
    \               |
        \

        \

        \          {

        \
        \       |

        \    4
        A      |

        \     H
        ac i  B

              Camera


    Figure 3-3: We are looking for the horizontal angle that the cone makes with the
    camera; we are looking for the angle 𝛽. The distance between the cone and the center
    of the image (𝑏) is averaged between the two left and right images. The angle 𝛽 can
    be calculated by the following equation:
                  2𝑏
        𝛽 = 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛( 𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛼))



interference (i.e. their edge does not go through a wall) are connected if the Euclidean
distance is less than a specified parameter. The web of connected nodes are generated
once and saved. The saved web of connected nodes are loaded every time the ROS
path service is re-started.

   A path is created between the start and next goal point using Dijkstra’s search
algorithm with Euclidean distance between nodes as weights.

   The ROS path service uses the PRM path planner to plan a path from waypoint
to waypoint.

   When the car detects a cone, it must re-plan a path around the cone in the correct
direction: right for green and, left for red and yellow). The planner constructs a

        26

    X




        z

        HX
    f        f
    Baseline     oO’
       B

    Figure 3-4: The distance the cone is from the car can be calculated by using parallax
    property of the left and right images. we want to solve for the distance 𝑧.

        𝑧 = 𝑥𝐵𝑓
        − 𝑥′
    The term 𝐵𝑓 was determined empirically through linear regression.

    straight path to the correct side of the cone and re-plans a path from the current
    point to one end point of the straight line and from the other end of the straight line
    back onto the originally planned path.
    To create the straight line to the side of the cone, a perpendicular line to the
    original base path is constructed through the cone. Two concentric circles are drawn
    around the cone and where the perpendicular line intersects the inner cone becomes
    the midpoint of the straight path. The end points of the path are constructed by
    drawing the straight line parallel to the base path and through the midpoint. (Fig.3-6)


3.1.4 Visualization

   I used rviz to visualize the information from the RACECAR and to monitor the
status of the planner and the vision system. Rviz is used to make sure that the car
is localizing, planning, and recognizing cones in the correct manner (Fig.3-7). Rviz
is run on a laptop that is connected on the same network as the RACECAR and
the ROS_MASTER_URI is set to the IP address of the RACECAR. Rviz is important in

        27

    y |        |
          |

          1     AL
        we     3
    1.        4 Pan

       |110    J



    Figure 3-5: Waypoints picked around the basement connected with a straight line
    path.

        ine
        N    TY
        en   NL %

                 Figure 3-6: Cone path construction process.

visualizing the RACECAR state and a powerful debugging tool.


3.2 Commonsense monitor

   One way to check for the anomalies in the scene is to understand what the
scene parser believes to be in the scene and how those elements interact with each
other. Translating the labeled scene into a human readable description can provide a
structured way to parse the scene elements through natural language processing. The
description of the scene (with objects as detected by perception) can be broken down
into subject, object, and verb. [13] The system then constructs a Trans-frame from the
description which represents the concepts in a language free way. Trans-frames work
to represent concepts as complex combinations of language-free conceptual primitives

        28

    File Panels Help


    lobat  opirs         ed]         views
                                     Type:    orbit (vin)
                                                  Zer0

                                     Curren...
            Light        307         Nea...   0.01
    Frame Rate
                                      ime
    lana   Status  Ok                         edi
    «arr    Frame        v             i      005
       et                             Yaw     619179
                                     Pitch    1.0698
                                      Foc.    [13096;2.
    Topic

                         01
    Keep   Tolerance
    Shape                Soo
                         v
                         v
                         v

    Topic                Ja     J  |
    Siem)                Flatᵛ     ol
    Sle

    Ah
    Peston               X02
    Color                Inte.

                         ne
    giro                 v
    Min Color                I
    Max Color                2
                         6...

                         hie
    ara







   da                                save Remove                                              Rename

    TimeTime: 5312329425 ROS Elapsed: 136.70  Wall Times 155312325432 olElapsed: 13667  Experimental
  ROS
 Reset


Figure 3-7: Rviz shows that the lidar points matches the map (the rainbow points),
the location of the green cone seen, and the path planned around the green cone. The
set of red arrows show the estimation of the car’s pose.










                         29

for an inner language ontology [13].The commonsense knowledge base is applied to
the frame to evaluate the “reasonableness” of the frame (Fig.3-8)

                              Single   Compound
                             Primitive      Primitive       Subject  ||  Object  ||  Reason
                                                            Anchor       Anchor    -able

Monkey throws
 Aflowerhitsananapple    | PROPEL | GRASP, PROPEL, MOVE ||  animal   |   object  ||  Yes
Atree hits a carinaapple ||  PROPEL | GRASP.                plant    |   object       No
Acar leaks gasstorm          PROPEL  PROPEL, MOVE           weather |    plant   |   Yes
                              EXPEL     EXPEL                        |
  A man breathes out         EXPEL      EXPEL               person   |    None   ||  Yes
   A man eats food           INGEST     INGEST              person   |    None   |   Yes
                                                            person       object      Yes
A giraffe eatsa leaves       INGEST     INGEST              animal   |   plant       Yes
     A'boat eats
    plant                    INGEST     INGEST              vehicle  |   plant   |    No

Figure 3-8: Symbolic breakdown of sentences of scene descriptions and their respective
reasonableness [13]

                This frame parsing and commonsense knowledge base can be used as a check on
the reasonableness of objects in the vehicle’s range of sight. The monitor uses this
approach and checks if the perceived action in the scene is plausible and fits within
the commonsense framework.
             Here is how the approach can determine the observation that “a mailbox crossed
the street” is unreasonable. Firstly, the MOVE primitive requires that the actor role
must be filled by an “animate” object that can make other objects move or change
location. Here, the actor role is filled by “mailbox”. To determine whether it satisfies
or violates the constraint on the actor role, the system attempts to anchor the mailbox
concept to a concept in ConceptNet to determine if it is an animate object or not. In
this case there is a path through ConceptNet’s graph between “mailbox” and “object”,
the anchor for inanimate objects, and no path between “mailbox”and “animal,” the
anchor for animate objects. So the system determines that “mailbox” is inanimate
and flags a violation of the actor constraints for the MOVE primitive act [13].
         The path planning stage is an alternative place in the autonomous driving pipeline
where the common sense and validity of the decision in context with the scene can be
checked. One application checks the commanded speed of the car with with a known
knowledge base of speed limit data to give the car context awareness control of its
speed [24]. If all the cars surrounding the current vehicle are all traveling below the

                                  30

    Sensing  Perception  Decision










        Figure 3-9: Computer architecture for autonomous driving [18]

speed limit due to an emergency vehicle or if the roads are particularly poor, the car
still believes that the maximum speed limit posted when in working reality the limit is
lower. Our system can observe the surrounding situation, see that the average speed
of other vehicles are significantly below the speed limit, mark the phenomena as an
anomaly, and then proceed to update the rules file to lower the speed limit if in the
same situations again.


    3.3     Driving rules

          There are rules for passing each cones, just like there are rules for encountering
    each color of traffic life when driving on real roads. The rules for passing each cone is
    as such:

     1. green cone: pass on the right

     2. red cone: pass on the left

     3. yellow cone: pass on the left

            The driving rules are built into the controller that processes each cone that is
    detected. The driving rule is currently represented with the boolean flag “right.” Since
    the car passes a green cone on the right side, that boolean is set to be true when a

         31

green cone is detected. The controller subscribes to a cone channel that contains cone
information, which then requests the path planner to plan around the cone accordingly.
The car also has a set of rules regarding traffic light order, which is stored in a Python
dictionary. Each cone color maps to a list of allowed preceding colors. After the
car passes a cone, the car logs the cone location, car location, and time that it was
recorded. The car also checks the color against the last color that it saw and checks if
it was a valid transition. If the transition was not valid, the car logs the error, why it
is an error, and what color it expected to see given the previous color.
    After driving past a set of cones representing a single traffic light, the autonomous
driving mode is paused to signal to the system that it is ready for the next set of
traffic lights. After each set of traffic lights, the local history of colors seen is reset.
The log is not reset and all of the cones/traffic lights seen are aggregated until the
end of the test.


3.4 Updating rules

   The rule update system is a working system developed by Gilpin et al.[11]. The
system is designed to incorporate new rules into the adaptable monitoring system[12].
First, the rule update system reads in an error text file. It then processes errors
to determine whether any of them occur multiple times. If there is more than one
instance, then it uses the error information to create a new rule. Rule updating
can also occur using sentiment analysis of explanations of the anomalous sighting.
Sentiment analysis and adding explanations to each anomaly sighting is currently
being explored as an expansion of this thesis.
   A new rule is created by parsing the error log text. For example, when a green
cone appears after a yellow cones several times, it creates a new rule that permits a
green cone to appear after a yellow cone. This transition no longer triggers an error
in the log text after the rule is updated.
   The rule updating system looks for specific keywords in the error description, for
example, “before,” “after,” “because,” etc. If it finds a that keyword, then it processes

        32

the text before and after that word for the rule binding. This creates a symbolic
triple, composed of the text before the keyword, the keyword itself, and the text after
the keyword. This triple is used in the new rule text, which is output into the AIR
Web Policy Rule Language[2]. The end result is a new AIR rule, written in N3 that
is appended to the existing rule file. The resulting new AIR rule is then read by a
human and then manually added to the existing python dictionary as a new rule.
The RACECAR then checks its sightings against this set of updated rules. In the
future, the rules updating process can be automated. This would happen in two parts.
Firstly, if a new rule is needed, it would be compared to the rules in the existing rules
file. If there is a similar rule already present, then the new rule would not need to be
added. Otherwise, the new rule would be automatically appended to the AIR rule file
and applied in next iterations of the system.










    33

34
34

    Chapter 4

    Evaluation and Results



   I evaluated the reasonableness monitor and the rule updating system with various
traffic light scenarios and this chapter provides an overview of my evaluation. The
system was evaluated by navigating the RACECAR autonomously around up to 20
small plastic cones that represent traffic light patterns. Each cone represents a specific
traffic light color a car would see and each group of cones represents a single set of
traffic light transitions a car would encounter at an intersection. Anomalies were
introduced to the traffic light patterns, and I evaluated how the RACECAR detected
the anomalies and the rules update process that followed.
   There are four possible scenarios for traffic light transitions. Here are the possible
transitions along with their explanations

   1. green: car goes through green light

   2. red → green: car stops at red light, leaves when light turns green

   3. yellow → red → green: car approaches light while it is yellow, stops when it
      turns red, leaves when it turns green

   4. green → yellow → red → green: car approaches light when it turns from green
      to yellow, stops when it turns red, leaves when it turns green

   Since the project focuses on transitions, there are three transitions possible

        35

 1. red → green

 2. yellow → red

 3. green → yellow

  I limited each traffic light to have one erroneous transition. There are three possible
erroneous transitions since for each color, there is only one color that can come after
it that will make the transition erroneous. The other two colors are either correct or
the same as the initial color. The three erroneous transitions are:

 1. red → yellow

 2. yellow → green

 3. green → red

  Using these erroneous transitions, these are the possible traffic lights with a single
erroneous transition with the error in bold.

 1.  red → yellow → red → green

 2.  yellow → green

 3.  green → red → green

  In each test run, the car navigated five traffic lights, or five sets of cones.
  I decided to run three different sets of tests. The first set involved no errors, the
second set involved random errors, and the third set involved repeated errors. All
three sets of tests are then evaluated with the rule updating system [11]. To avoid
bias in choosing traffic light patterns and their placement, each pattern was given a
number, and a random number generator was used to generate the sequence.
  For the first set of tests with no transition errors, the traffic light pattern was
a sequence of five randomly chosen subsequences. For the second set of tests with
random errors, I randomly chose the number of errors, where in the sequence of the
five lights the errors would appear, and which error would appear in each place. I

         36

randomly chose valid light sequences to fill the places in the sequence without an
error. For the last set of tests with repeated errors, I randomly chose a single type
of error and then randomly chose the number of times it would appear (a number
between three to five) as well as where in the sequence the error would appear. Again,
a randomly chosen valid light sequence was chosen to fill the places in the sequence
without an error.

   I generated five instances of each type of sequence and allowed the RACECAR to
drive through the resulting course three times, which generates a sum total of 45 tests.





    4.1 Testing setup


   The cones were setup in the basement about four feet apart from each other to
test the RACECAR’s ability to navigate through cones and detecting errors in the
cone transitions (Fig.4-1

   The car was required to navigate around all of the traffic cones until the end of
the course. The log file was saved and the process repeated.

   A total of 15 unique sequences were tested (Fig.4.1, Fig.4.2, Fig.4.3)

   The RACECAR is connected to a game pad, and the R1 button gives control
of the VESC motor controller to the autonomous system. When the button is not
pressed, the joystick sends a command of 0 speed to the VESC. Joystick input always
has priority over the autonomous navigation VESC commands as a safety feature.
VESC executes commands from the navigation topic only when R1 is pressed. This
is to ensure the safety of the car as the testing area is an active hallway with foot
traffic. The car is in autonomous control when it navigates around cones. When it
completes a set of cones representing a traffic light, the R1 button is released to signal
to the system that it has completed a single traffic light and to reset its queue of light
sightings for the next traffic light.

        37

sequence # light1   light2  light3 light4  light5
1          green    green    red    green  yellow
                            green   yellow  red
                                     red   green
                                    green
2     green        yellow   yellow   red    red
                     red     red    green  green
                    green   green

3          yellow    red    green   green  yellow
            red     green           green   red
           green                           green

4          green   yellow   yellow  green   red
                     red     red yellow    green
                    green   green    red
                                    green
5          green     red     red    green  yellow
           yellow   green   green           red
            red             green          green
           green

Table 4.1: The five chosen sequences of traffic lights without transition errors










                    38

sequence # light1   light2  light3  light4  light5
6          green    green   green   yellow  green
           yellow                 green
            red
           green
7          green     red    yellow yellow    red
                    green    red  green     yellow
                            green            red

8          yellow   green   green    red    green
           green     red     red    green
                    green   green

9          green   yellow    red    green   green
            red     green   green    red    yellow
           green                    green    red
                                            green
10         green   yellow   yellow  green   yellow
                     red     red            green
                    green   green


Table 4.2: The five chosen sequences of traffic lights with some random transition
errors.










                    39

sequence #  light1  light2  light3  light4  light5
    11      yellow  yellow  yellow  yellow  yellow
            green   green   green   green   green


    12      green   green   green   green green
             red     red     red     red
            green   green   green   green

    13      green   green   green   green   green
             red     red     red     red     red
            green   green   green   green   green

    14      yellow  yellow  yellow  green   yellow
            green green     green   yellow  green
                                     red
                                    green
    15  green        red     red yellow      red
        yellow              yellow   red    yellow
                     red     red    green    red


    Table 4.3: The five chosen sequences of traffic lights with repeating transition errors.










    40

    x
    Q SA    2 Y     /

        SAN           /
        5   et  =F    A
    ~      RE:   -    i
    od        >
                Ta

        is     +




    2
    Zz










        Figure 4-1: Cone setup in the basement of MIT’s Stata building

4.2 Results

   In this section, I discuss the results I obtained by autonomously navigating each of
the 15 unique traffic light sequences three 3 each. The rules updater was used on each
of the error logs to find repeated anomalies and to create new rules for valid traffic
light transitions.


4.2.1 Anomaly detection

   The RACECAR was able to navigate through the cones successfully and detect
errors as they occurred. Each cone detected was logged after the car had successfully
passed the cone. At times the RACECAR erroneously detected a cone twice; however,
that error did not significantly affect the experiment, as it is valid to see the same

        41

    traffic light color more than once. The error does not induce an unwanted transition
    error. Example log files from each of the three differing groups of runs (no anomaly,
    some anomalies, repeated anomalies) can be found in Appendix A.

    Rules Update

     The rule updating system reads in the error log (example listed in appendix A).
    The system found an occurrence of a repeated transition errors (green after yellow)
    and created a new rule that green can be expected to come after yellow. The output
    of the updating system, which is a rule, is illustrated below. The rule updating system
    was able to successfully detect the recurring light transition errors in each log and
    update the rule base.         I evaluated one error log from each of the 15 unique cone
    sequences using the rule updating system. The rule updating system generated new
    rules for each log that had repeated transition anomalies.

 1   >>  python3    rule - learn . py       repeat1
 2   The  following     events    are       repeats and should                     be new rules
 3   ERROR  green            appeared after yellow
 4   Found  the     explanation   ERROR     green     appeared                     after yellow
 5   Found  triple
 6   [ ’ green ’ ,  ’ after ’ , ’ yellow ’]
 7
 8   : added - rule -1  a     air : Belief - rule ;
 9        rdfs : comment     " Trying this  out     .";
10        air : if  {
11          foo : green            ontology : after foo : yellow .                 };
12        air : then [
13                      air : description (" ERROR  green                    appeared after yellow ");
14                                   air : assert [ air : statement { foo : cone   air : compliant - with : learned_policy .}]] ;
15        air : else   [
16                                   air : assert [ air : statement { foo : cone   air : non - compliant - with : learned_policy .}]] ;










                                                                                   42

    Chapter 5

    Conclusion



    In this chapter, I describe the many improvements functionally and evaluation-wise
    that we hope to add to our project.


5.1 Future Work

   The work done for this thesis was focused on building and using the RACECAR
platform to evaluate the performance of anomaly detection in autonomous vehicles
based on symbolic rules/reasonableness. This was an initial study and the work can
be expanded to include a richer set of data used in decision making, such as vehicle
position, cone position, vehicle speed, information from potential other vehicles around
the autonomous vehicle. A far more expansive set of rules can also be applied to
the car’s behavior and observations. The set of rules should originate from a driving
handbook, which details the literal rules set for the vehicles on the road. Additionally,
given that autonomous vehicles interact with other vehicles and it would be interesting
to apply the anomaly detection and adaptable monitoring system to an autonomous
vehicle in the presence of other possibly non-autonomous vehicles.
   Currently when a rule is violated, the error is logged along with the violated rule.
The rule learning system currently performs the rules updating process by simply
checking for repeating anomalies, and automatically adds the anomaly as a rule in
the acceptable rule set. This process does not utilize the contextual information from

        43

the vehicle’s state and surroundings in making the decision as to whether or not to
add the rule to the rule set. Adding context to each anomaly helps explain why the
rule was broken. For example, one rule of the road states that vehicles shall not
drive through red lights. However, if a car happens to observe multiple times that
an emergency vehicle drives through a red light, it should not add to its own rule set
that it should be able to drive through a red light. The context of the rule breaking
situation, in this case it is an emergency vehicle that drove through the red light
and not other vehicles, is an important factor in deciding whether to augment the
given rule set based on observations. A natural next step is to add explanations to
each observed anomaly to allow the rules updating system to base its updates on
more than just repeated sightings of an anomaly within a short time frame. Context
contributes to explanations. For example, the traffic lights could appear out of order
because the light itself is physically broken, or because the car misinterpreted one
color as another, among other possible reasons. Just because the car interprets the
color incorrectly does not mean it should now automatically accept that the traffic
lights go in a different order. Taking explanations into account when updating rules is
important because there are certain circumstances and contexts that cannot simply be
learned by querying data. Explanations are important for learning from few examples
and learning in new contexts. For example, some situations with multiple plausible
behaviors will not be well-represented in the training data, like flashing headlights or
pothole maneuvers, because they are rare events or they change in different contexts.
But the machine still has to learn to abstract from these examples, in order to explain
the plausibility of their actions (to themselves). This is similar to the ways that
humans learn.

   Similar work by [19] looks at explaining individual predictions made by an LSTM
without any modifications to the underlying model. This is similar to the reason-
ableness monitoring work [12], except that this work also aims to learn from those
explanations to make better decisions moving forward. This is similar to one-shot
learning[17], which aims to learn information from just a few examples.

   Learning behaviors and rules has largely been explored in the context of fraud

        44

detection and other contexts. Sarno et al. created financial fraud detection methods
that aim to create a list of association rules to better detect malicious behaviors [21].
Rule learning with monitoring, the ongoing work in this project, aims to learn from
the explanations of a monitoring system to learn new rules and behaviors to aid in
learning over future iterations.

   The process we can apply to rule learning in the future is the following. First,
we examine and process the explanation for its sentiment. Sentiment analysis is a
well-studied area that aims to predict the polarity of a given text. For our use case of a
self-driving car, this is important to deem whether the intended behavior is explained
to be anomalous (or not). For example, when we learn to drive, when we perceive
anomalous driving behavior, we explain it as so, saying for instance that the driver
must be in a hurry or the vehicle is an emergency vehicle and therefore follow a different
set of rules. Or, if we cannot conjure up an explanation, it means the situation must be
anomalous. Other behaviors that should be covered by new rules will have a neutral or
positive sentiment. Those explanations should be parsed, and automatically re-input
into the system as new rules. These new rules could be strict driving rules, or best
practices. For example, a vehicle may perceive several neighboring cars proceeding to
turn right through a red light. After seeing the repeated action, the vehicle should
reason that this is an accepted behavior because multiple cars have performed the
action, thus a neutral sentiment explanation. In other instances, a vehicle may observe
several cars driving extremely sporadically, which is accompanied with honking and
yelling. This negative sentiment explanation; that vehicles are intersecting lanes
aggressively, should not be learned as a new rule.

   After the sentiment of the explanation is classified, the explanation is parsed into
a rule format. The goal is to take a human readable explanation in plain text, and
parse that into an "if this then that" format rule. Usually, this relies on looking for
symbolic causal terms in the explanation, like "because" or time-varying symbolic
terms like "before" and "after."

   Another extension of the project is to implement the work by Gilpin et al.’s
[13] work in regards to reasonable monitoring using scene parser and conceptual

        45

primitive decomposition. In place of the traffic light pattern rules, a set of rules
derived from a driving handbook can offer a richer set of rules against which one can
check reasonableness. To utilize the full set of rules also requires building a richer
environment for the RACECAR to emulate a real-world driving situation.


5.2 Summary

   Current tools developed for anomaly detection use rule based systems that are
generated using training data and humans-in-the-loop. There still remains the problem
of edge case training data and the necessity of human intervention which prevents a
vehicle from being truly autonomous. My work focuses on addressing these issues in
anomaly detection by using a commonsense knowledge base, a predefined set of rules,
and a means of updating the base set of rules as anomalies are found and classified.
The hardware platform allows for the future development of the project and generates
realistic data for evaluation.
   In this thesis, I built and implemented a version of the open source MIT RACECAR
project as a hardware platform to test the anomaly detection and rules updating
framework. The experiments involved navigating the RACECAR around sets of cones
that represent traffic light color orders that mimicked real life driving scenarios. The
car contained driving rules on how to navigate each colored cone and also rules on
valid traffic light transitions and checked each detected cone against the traffic light
order rules. Anomalies were introduced to the traffic light color orders so some lights
did not appear in the normal green-yellow-red order. The car navigated the course
with no anomalies, some anomalies, and repeating anomalies. The car logged all cones
that it saw and flagged unexpected traffic light color transitions. The rules updating
framework was applied to the logs and was able to find the patterned irregularities.
   This traffic light experiment is a simple example of how anomaly detection coupled
with a rule updating framework could work together in real life to inform the car
of unreasonable and strange sightings. Machine learning relies on training data and
previously seen input. However, not all corner cases can be accounted for so it is

        46

impossible to include all scenarios that an autonomous systems might encounter. As
autonomous machines become more complex, there are more ways that they can fail.
Updating an existing set of rules from anomalies and new situations is a natural way
to make these systems more robust.










    47

48
  48

    Appendix A

    Example Error Logs




    Listing A.1: Log file for traffic lights without transition errors: sequence 1 (Fig. 4.1)

 1 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
 2 saw green
 3 cone location [ -0.70446253 0.23700085]
 4 car location ( -0.12512813510112328 , 0.4072552633235104 , 1.8437552010002323)
 5 time : 1553038041.35
 6
 7 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
 8 saw green
 9 cone location [ -6.38526051 -1.70969481]
10 car location ( -6.4912590232822875 , -1.0678897144438855 , -2.9804117470938833)
11 time : 1553038064.36
12
13 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
14 saw red
15 cone location [ -11.50563859 -1.73875663]
16 car location ( -11.456451314827829 , -2.315995950535272 , -3.0482012567101666)
17 time : 1553038086.38
18
19 saw green
20 cone location [ -14.15248748 0.13420653]
21 car location ( -13.351984151667699 , 0.18374850272711785 , 1.6066485891543618)
22 time : 1553038095.94
23
24 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
25 saw green
26 cone location [ -19.30022175 -1.77057121]
27 car location ( -19.48897722935647 , -1.2483664208150635 , -2.8652253641792074)
28 time : 1553038118.62
29
30 saw yellow
31 cone location [ -24.67044653 -1.57417882]
32 car location ( -24.68702891795409 , -2.1359811617575937 , -3.103686420670335)
33 time : 1553038131.1
34
35 saw red
36 cone location [ -30.58494499 -0.7577518 ]
37 car location ( -30.658686803678684 , -1.3353637145970723 , 3.0455743285365346)
38 time : 1553038144.24


    49

39
40 saw green
41 cone location [ -34.34016167 2.62120769]
42 car location ( -34.18001420292492 , 2.794288198890393 , 2.3343337379010456)
43 time : 1553038160.22
44
45 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
46 saw yellow
47 cone location [ -33.21207141 7.47530798]
48 car location ( -33.840991480649876 , 7.8568159855428865 , 1.0440188153549848)
49 time : 1553038179.61
50
51 saw red
52 cone location [ -34.17586175 11.28563998]
53 car location ( -34.117080750338964 , 11.417297031161104 , 2.4424683651814014)
54 time : 1553038186.22
55
56 saw green
57 cone location [ -31.83868132 15.16909006]
58 car location ( -32.15516789144839 , 14.519568666374552 , -0.4756447847178715)
59 time : 1553038199.0
60
61 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .


    Listing A.2: Log file for traffic lights with random transition errors: sequence 6 (Fig.
    4.2)

 1
 2 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
 3 saw green
 4 cone location [ -1.20315832 -0.57228048]
 5 car location ( -1.2807292373046169 , -0.008971256600969731 , -3.0264783894113085)
 6 time : 1553037644.94
 7
 8 saw yellow
 9 cone location [ -2.49782205 -1.92630994]
10 car location ( -1.9638795288997635 , -1.5684364132220296 , -0.93282282599856)
11 time : 1553037651.4
12
13 saw red
14 cone location [ -7.96080256 -1.89994298]
15 car location ( -8.02980957114717 , -2.4681837086565985 , 3.0382115362831588)
16 time : 1553037684.28
17
18 saw green
19 cone location [ -9.44727791 0.39579729]
20 car location ( -8.621296727143589 , 0.2301645655152624 , 1.3714112915027268)
21 time : 1553037693.09
22
23 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
24 saw green
25 cone location [ -14.47189755 -1.59112153]
26 car location ( -14.658315373707493 , -0.9990677773305542 , -2.8413766870470294)
27 time : 1553037714.65
28
29 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
30 saw green
31 cone location [ -19.43948253 -0.20877225]
32 car location ( -19.510456483194357 , 0.3892001437817271 , -3.0336650258367035)
33 time : 1553037733.79


    50

34
35 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
36 saw yellow
37 cone location [ -21.91674007 -1.76080718]
38 car location ( -21.683795071972185 , -2.244401572444239 , -2.677808801675548)
39 time : 1553037747.93
40
41 saw green
42 cone location [ -24.16844617 0.46777857]
43 car location ( -25.223320369495866 , 0.3018080517785095 , 1.742221673684914)
44 time : 1553037760.72
45
46 ERROR green appeared after yellow
47
48 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
49 saw green
50 cone location [ -32.41609897 0.96640755]
51 car location ( -32.35564716060205 , 0.9661621132886078 , 1.171794563747732)
52 time : 1553037794.31
53
54 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .


    Listing A.3: Log file for traffic lights with repeated transition errors: sequence 11 (Fig.
    4.3)

 1
 2 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
 3 saw yellow
 4 cone location [ -1.31887591 -1.64536433]
 5 car location ( -1.2090173028168014 , -2.2019288544649043 , -2.9311938578398773)
 6 time : 1553045002.14
 7
 8 saw green
 9 cone location [ -4.28213169 0.39424341]
10 car location ( -3.40236644288562 , 0.4600299266547557 , 1.6410429459543834)
11 time : 1553045012.41
12
13 ERROR green appeared after yellow
14
15 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
16 saw yellow
17 cone location [ -8.92437828 -1.66078512]
18 car location ( -8.401970577213934 , -1.534493414519475 , -1.3154733974639097)
19 time : 1553045033.04
20
21 saw green
22 cone location [ -12.09853355 0.11984987]
23 car location ( -11.23656919129367 , 0.2965209723608454 , 1.7595208200356645)
24 time : 1553045046.33
25
26 ERROR green appeared after yellow
27
28 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
29 saw yellow
30 cone location [ -14.0137413 -1.86614991]
31 car location ( -15.11967917801224 , -1.9617358128938507 , -1.4989679564934923)
32 time : 1553045068.65
33
34 saw green
35 cone location [ -18.89876099 -0.34748259]


        51

36 car location ( -18.960254034884645 , -0.3407134188498406 , 1.7032764889091314)
37 time : 1553045088.02
38
39 ERROR green appeared after yellow
40
41 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
42 saw yellow
43 cone location [ -22.25739228 -1.7517678 ]
44 car location ( -22.13849379657888 , -2.281988283444419 , -2.8843460102308853)
45 time : 1553045104.32
46
47 saw green
    48  cone location [ -27.1093992  0.41790404]
49 car location ( -28.400852597730562 , 0.43198412515118906 , 1.6092593228560392)
50 time : 1553045117.76
51
52 ERROR green appeared after yellow
53
54 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .
55 saw yellow
56 cone location [ -33.81228796 5.44165228]
57 car location ( -34.42702165092025 , 5.383335779546803 , 1.6836666322138085)
58 time : 1553045145.7
59
60 saw green
61 cone location [ -33.03422111 10.77680577]
62 car location ( -32.50144893436689 , 10.741673750778823 , 1.498008306197782)
63 time : 1553045158.72
64
65 ERROR green appeared after yellow
66
67 .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .










                                     52

   Bibliography



[1] AI Mistakes Bus-Side Ad for Famous CEO, Charges Her with Jaywalk-
   ing. https://www.caixinglobal.com/2018-11-22/ai-mistakes-bus-side-a
   d-for-famous-ceo-charges-her-with-jaywalkingdo-101350772.html. life
   news.

   [2] AIR Web Rule Language. http://dig.csail.mit.edu/2009/AIR/.

[3] Experimental Security Research of Tesla Autopilot. https://keenlab.tencent.
   com/en/whitepapers/Experimental_Security_Research_of_Tesla_Autopil
   ot.pdf.

   [4]  mit-racecar. https://github.com/mit-racecar. Accessed Mar 13, 2018. Github
        Repository.

   [5]  PRELIMINARY REPORT HIGHWAY HWY18MH010. https://www.ntsb.gov
        /investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/HWY18MH010-prelim.pdf.

[6] The Grand Challenge. https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/timeline/-grand
   -challenge-for-autonomous-vehicles. DARPA.

   [7]  Uber’s Self-Driving Car Saw the Woman It Killed, Report Says. https://www.
        wired.com/story/uber-self-driving-crash-arizona-ntsb-report/.

   [8] VESC Project. https://vesc-project.com/.

[9] Waymo unveils self-driving taxi service in Arizona for paying customers.
   https://www.reuters.com/article/us-waymo-selfdriving-focus/waymo
   -unveils-self-driving-taxi-service-in-arizona-for-paying-customers
   -idUSKBN1O41M2. arizona.

  [10]  Ivan Evtimov, Kevin Eykholt, Earlence Fernandes, Tadayoshi Kohno, Bo Li, Atul
        Prakash, Amir Rahmati, and Dawn Song. Robust physical-world attacks on
        machine learning models. CoRR, abs/1707.08945, 2017.

  [11]  Leilani H. Gilpin. Learning symbolic commonsense rules through explanation.
        2019.

  [12]  Leilani H. Gilpin and Lalana Kagal. An adaptable self-monitoring framwork for
        complex machines. page 3, 2019.

            53

[13] Leilani Henrina Gilpin, Jamie C. Macbeth, and Evelyn Florentine. Monitoring
     scene understanders with conceptual primitive decomposition and commonsense
     knowledge. 2018.
[14] Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and har-
     nessing adversarial examples. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
    tations, 2015.
[15] Brody Huval, Tao Wang, Sameep Tandon, Jeff Kiske, Will Song, Joel Pazhayam-
     pallil, Mykhaylo Andriluka, Pranav Rajpurkar, Toki Migimatsu, Royce Cheng-
    Yue, Fernando A. Mujica, Adam Coates, and Andrew Y. Ng. An empirical
     evaluation of deep learning on highway driving. CoRR, abs/1504.01716, 2015.
[16] A. Inzartsev, A. Pavin, A. Kleschev, V. Gribova, and G. Eliseenko. Application
     of artificial intelligence techniques for fault diagnostics of autonomous underwater
    vehicles. In OCEANS 2016 MTS/IEEE Monterey, pages 1–6, Sep. 2016.
[17] Fei-Fei Li, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. One-shot learning of object categories.
    IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 28(4):594–611,
    2006.
[18] Shaoshan Liu, Jie Tang, Zhe Zhang, and Jean-Luc Gaudiot. CAAD: computer
     architecture for autonomous driving. CoRR, abs/1702.01894, 2017.
[19] W. James Murdoch, Peter J. Liu, and Bin Yu. Beyond word importance: Con-
     textual decomposition to extract interactions from lstms. CoRR, abs/1801.05453,
    2018.
[20] Ramya Ramakrishnan, Ece Kamar, Besmira Nushi, Debadeepta Dey, Julie Shah,
     and Eric Horvitz. Overcoming blind spots in the real world: Leveraging comple-
     mentary abilities for joint execution. 2019.
[21] Riyanarto Sarno, Rahadian Dustrial Dewandono, Tohari Ahmad, Moham-
     mad Farid Naufal, and Fernandes Sinaga. Hybrid association rule learning and
     process mining for fraud detection. IAENG International Journal of Computer
    Science, 42(2), 2015.
[22] William Saunders, Girish Sastry, Andreas Stuhlmueller, and Owain Evans. Trial
    without error: Towards safe reinforcement learning via human intervention. In
    Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
    MultiAgent Systems, pages 2067–2069. International Foundation for Autonomous
    Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.
[23] Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Shaked Shammah, and Amnon Shashua. Safe, multi-agent,
     reinforcement learning for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295,
    2016.
[24] Lihua Zhao, Ryutaro Ichise, Seiichi Mita, and Yutaka Sasaki. An ontology-based
     intelligent speed adaptation system for autonomous cars. 11 2014.

        54

