arXiv:1910.10897v2  [cs.LG]  14 Jun 2021










                   Meta-World: A Benchmark and Evaluation for
                   Multi-Task and Meta Reinforcement Learning

Tianhe Yu∗1, Deirdre Quillen∗2, Zhanpeng He∗3, Ryan Julian∗4, Avnish Narayan∗4,
                      Hayden Shively4, Adithya Bellathur4,
                 Karol Hausman5, Chelsea Finn1, Sergey Levine2
           Stanford University1, UC Berkeley2, Columbia University3,
            University of Southern California4, Robotics at Google5



Abstract: Meta-reinforcement learning algorithms can enable robots to acquire
new skills much more quickly, by leveraging prior experience to learn how to
learn. However, much of the current research on meta-reinforcement learning fo-
cuses on task distributions that are very narrow. For example, a commonly used
meta-reinforcement learning benchmark uses different running velocities for a
simulated robot as different tasks. When policies are meta-trained on such narrow
task distributions, they cannot possibly generalize to more quickly acquire entirely
new tasks. Therefore, if the aim of these methods is enable faster acquisition of
entirely new behaviors, we must evaluate them on task distributions that are suffi-
ciently broad to enable generalization to new behaviors. In this paper, we propose
an open-source simulated benchmark for meta-reinforcement learning and multi-
task learning consisting of 50 distinct robotic manipulation tasks. Our aim is to
make it possible to develop algorithms that generalize to accelerate the acquisition
of entirely new, held-out tasks. We evaluate 7 state-of-the-art meta-reinforcement
learning and multi-task learning algorithms on these tasks. Surprisingly, while
each task and its variations (e.g., with different object positions) can be learned
with reasonable success, these algorithms struggle to learn with multiple tasks at
the same time, even with as few as ten distinct training tasks. Our analysis and
open-source environments pave the way for future research in multi-task learning
and meta-learning that can enable meaningful generalization, thereby unlocking
the full potential of these methods.1



        Keywords: meta-learning, multi-task reinforcement learning, benchmarks

1 Introduction
While reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved some success in domains such as assembly [1], ping
pong [2], in-hand manipulation [3], and hockey [4], state-of-the-art methods require substantially
more experience than humans to acquire only one narrowly-defined skill. If we want robots to be
broadly useful in realistic environments, we instead need algorithms that can learn a wide variety of
skills reliably and efficiently. Fortunately, in most specific domains, such as robotic manipulation or
locomotion, many individual tasks share common structure that can be reused to acquire related tasks
more efficiently. For example, most robotic manipulation tasks involve grasping or moving objects
in the workspace. However, while current methods can learn to individual skills like screwing on a
bottle cap [1] and hanging a mug [5], we need algorithms that can efficiently learn shared structure
across many related tasks, and use that structure to learn new skills quickly, such as screwing a jar lid
or hanging a bag. Recent advances in machine learning have provided unparalleled generalization
    ∗ denotes equal contribution
   1Videos of the benchmark tasks are on the anonymous project page: meta-world.github.io.
    Our open-sourced code for the benchmark is available at: https://github.com/rlworkgroup/
metaworld.
    All of the open-sourced baselines and launchers for our experiments can be found at https://github.
com/rlworkgroup/garage.
    This manuscript is an update on a manuscript that appeared at the 3rd Conference on Robot Learning
(CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.

capabilities in domains such as images [6] and speech [7], suggesting that this should be possible;
however, we have yet to see such generalization to diverse tasks in reinforcement learning settings.
Recent works in meta-learning and multi-task reinforcement learning have shown promise for ad-
dressing this gap. Multi-task RL methods aim to learn a single policy that can solve multiple tasks
more efficiently than learning the tasks individually, while meta-learning methods train on many
tasks, and optimize for fast adaptation to a new task. While these methods have made progress, the
development of both classes of approaches has been limited by the lack of established benchmarks
and evaluation protocols that reflect realistic use cases. On one hand, multi-task RL methods have
largely been evaluated on disjoint and overly diverse tasks such as the Atari suite [8], where there
is little efficiency to be gained by learning across games [9]. On the other hand, meta-RL methods
have been evaluated on very narrow task distributions. For example, one popular evaluation of meta-
learning involves choosing different running directions for simulated legged robots [10], which then
enables fast adaptation to new directions. While these are technically distinct tasks, they are a far
cry from the promise of a meta-learned model that can adapt to any new task within some domain.
In order to study the capabilities of current multi-task and meta-reinforcement learning methods and
make it feasible to design new algorithms that actually generalize and adapt quickly on meaningfully
distinct tasks, we need evaluation protocols and task suites that are broad enough to enable this sort
of generalization, while containing sufficient shared structure for generalization to be possible.
The key contributions of this work are a suite of 50 diverse simulated manipulation tasks and an
extensive empirical evaluation of how previous methods perform on sets of such distinct tasks. We
contend that multi-task and meta reinforcement learning methods that aim to efficiently learn many
tasks and quickly generalize to new tasks should be evaluated on distributions of tasks that are di-
verse and exhibit shared structure. To this end, we present a benchmark of simulated manipulation
tasks with everyday objects, all of which are contained in a shared, table-top environment with a sim-
ulated Sawyer arm. By providing a large set of distinct tasks that share common environment and
control structure, we believe that this benchmark will allow researchers to test the generalization ca-
pabilities of the current multi-task and meta RL methods, and help to identify new research avenues
to improve the current approaches. Our empirical evaluation of existing methods on this benchmark
reveals that, despite some impressive progress in multi-task and meta-reinforcement learning over
the past few years, current methods are generally not able to learn diverse task sets, much less gen-
eralize successfully to entirely new tasks. We provide an evaluation protocol with evaluation modes
of varying difficulty, and observe that current methods show varying amounts of success on these
modes This opens the door for future developments in multi-task and meta reinforcement learning:
instead of focusing on further increasing performance on current narrow task suites, we believe that
it is essential for future work in these areas to focus on increasing the capabilities of algorithms to
handle highly diverse task sets.
By doing so, we can enable meaningful generalization across many tasks and achieve the full poten-
tial of meta-learning as a means of incorporating past experience to make it possible for robots to
acquire new skills as quickly as people can.

2 Related Work
Previous works that have proposed benchmarks for reinforcement learning have largely focused on
single task learning settings [11, 12, 13]. One popular benchmark used to study multi-task learning
is the Arcade Learning Environment, a suite of dozens of Atari 2600 games [14]. While having a
tremendous impact on the multi-task reinforcement learning research community [9, 15, 8, 16, 17],
the Atari games included in the benchmark have significant differences in visual appearance, con-
trols, and objectives, making it challenging to acquire any efficiency gains through shared learning.
In fact, many prior multi-task learning methods have observed substantial negative transfer between
the Atari games [9, 15]. In contrast, we would like to study a case where positive transfer between
the different tasks should be possible. We therefore propose a set of related yet diverse tasks that
share the same robot, action space, and workspace.
Meta-reinforcement learning methods have been evaluated on a number of different problems, in-
cluding maze navigation [18, 19, 20], continuous control domains with parametric variation across
tasks [10, 21, 22, 23], bandit problems [19, 18, 20, 24], levels of an arcade game [25], and locomo-
tion tasks with varying dynamics [26, 27]. Complementary to these evaluations, we aim to develop
a testbed of tasks and an evaluation protocol that are reflective of the challenges in applying meta-

        2

Figure 1: Meta-World contains 50 manipulation tasks, designed to be diverse yet carry shared struc-
ture that can be leveraged for efficient multi-task RL and transfer to new tasks via meta-RL. In the
most difficult evaluation, the method must use experience from 45 training tasks (left) to quickly
learn distinctly new test tasks (right). A larger view of the environments can be found on the next
page.
learning to robotic manipulation problems, including both parameteric and non-parametric variation
in tasks.
There is a long history of robotics benchmarks [28, 29, 30], datasets [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37],
competitions [38] and standardized object sets [39, 40] that have played an important role in robotics
research. Similarly, there exists a number of robotics simulation benchmarks including visual nav-
igation [41, 42, 43, 44, 45], autonomous driving [46, 47, 48], grasping [49, 50, 51], single-task
manipulation [52], among others. In this work, our aim is to continue this trend and provide a large
suite of tasks that will allow researchers to study multi-task learning, meta-learning, and transfer
in general. Further, unlike these prior simulation benchmarks, we particularly focus on providing a
suite of many diverse manipulation tasks and a protocol for multi-task and meta RL evaluation.

3 The Multi-Task and Meta-RL Problem Statements
Our proposed benchmark is aimed at making it possible to study generalization in meta-RL and
multi-task RL. In this section, we define the meta-RL and multi-task RL problem statements, and
describe some of the challenges associated with task distributions in these settings.
We use the formalism of Markov decision processes (MDPs), where each task T corresponds to a
different finite horizon MDP, represented by a tuple (S, A, P, R, H, γ), where s ∈ S correspond to
states, a ∈ A correspond to the available actions, P (st+1|st, at) represents the stochastic transition
dynamics, R(s, a) is a reward function, H is the horizon and γ is the discount factor. In standard
reinforcement learning, the goal is to learn a policy π(a|s) that maximizes the expected return, which
is the sum of (discounted) rewards over all time. In multi-task and meta-RL settings, we assume a
distribution of tasks p(T ). Different tasks may vary in any aspect of the Markov decision process,
though efficiency gains in adaptation to new tasks are only possible if the tasks share some common
structure. For example, as we describe in the next section, the tasks in our proposed benchmark have
the same action space and horizon, and structurally similar rewards and state spaces.2
Multi-task RL problem statement. The goal of multi-task RL is to learn a single, task-
conditioned policy π(a|s, z), where z indicates an encoding of the task ID. This policy should
maximize the average expected return across all tasks from the task distribution p(T ), given by
ET ∼p(T )[Eπ[∑T γtR (s , a about task be to policy
various e.g.
        ways, t=0 t t t)]]. The information the can provided the in
        using a one-hot task identification encoding z that is passed in addition to the cur-

   2In practice, the policy must be able to read in the state for each of the tasks, which typically requires them
to at least have the same dimensionality. In our benchmarks, some tasks have different numbers of objects, but
the state dimensionality is always the same, meaning that some state coordinates are unused for some tasks.

        3

    rent state. There is no separate test set of tasks, and multi-task RL algorithms are typically evaluated
    on their average performance over the training tasks.
    Meta-RL problem statement. Meta-reinforcement learning aims to leverage the set of training task
    to learn a policy π(a|s) that can quickly adapt to new test tasks that were not seen during training,
    where both training and test tasks are assumed to be drawn from the same task distribution p(T ).
    Typically, the training tasks are referred to as the meta-training set, to distinguish from the adaptation
    (training) phase performed on the (meta-) test tasks. During meta-training, the learning algorithm
    has access to M tasks {Ti}M      that are drawn from the task distribution p(T ). At meta-test time, a
    new task Tj ∼ p(T )   i=1
                            is sampled that was not seen during meta-training, and the meta-trained policy
    must quickly adapt to this task to achieve the highest return with a small number of samples. A
    key premise in meta-RL is that a sufficiently powerful meta-RL method can meta-learn a model that
    effectively implements a highly efficient reinforcement learning procedure, which can then solve
    entirely new tasks very quickly – much more quickly than a conventional reinforcement learning
    algorithm learning from scratch. However, in order for this to happen, the meta-training distribution
    p(T ) must be sufficiently broad to encompass these new tasks. Unfortunately, most prior work in
    meta-RL evaluates on very narrow task distributions, with only one or two dimensions of parametric
    variation, such as the running direction for a simulated robot [10, 21, 22, 23].

    4   Meta-World
    If we want meta-RL methods to generalize effectively to entirely new tasks, we must meta-train on
    broad task distributions that are representative of the range of tasks that a particular agent might need
    to solve in the future. To this end, we propose a new multi-task and meta-RL benchmark, which we
    call Meta-World. In this section, we motivate the design decisions behind the Meta-World tasks,
    discuss the range of tasks, describe the representation of the actions, observations, and rewards, and
    present a set of evaluation protocols of varying difficulty for both meta-RL and multi-task RL.
    4.1 The Space of Manipulation Tasks: Parametric and Non-Parametric Variability
    A task, T , in Meta-World is defined as the tu-
    ple (reward function,      initial object position,
    target position) Meta-learning makes two crit-          Non-Parametric Task Variation
    ical assumptions:     first, that the meta-training
    and meta-test tasks are drawn from the same          Parametric Task Variation
    distribution,      p(T ), and second, that the task
    distribution p(T ) exhibits shared structure that
    can be utilized for efficient adaptation to new         Reach Puck        Open Window
    tasks. If p(T ) is defined as a family of varia-
    tions within a particular control task, as in prior
    work [10, 22], then it is unreasonable to hope
    for generalization to entirely new control tasks.
    For example, an agent has little hope of being
    able to quickly learn to open a door, without
    having ever experienced doors before, if it has
    only been trained on a set of meta-training tasks
    that are homogeneous and narrow. Thus, to en-
    able meta-RL methods to adapt to entirely new
    tasks, we propose a much larger suite of tasks
    consisting of 50 qualitatively-distinct manipu-
    lation tasks, where continuous parameter varia-
    tion cannot be used to describe the differences
    between tasks.                                      Figure 2: Parametric/non-parametric variation: all
With such non-parametric variation, however, “reach puck” tasks (left) can be parameterized by the
there is the danger that tasks will not exhibit puck position, while the difference between “reach
enough shared structure, or will lack the task puck” and “open window” (right) is non-parametric.
overlap needed for the method to avoid memorizing each of the tasks. Motivated by this challenge,
we design each task to include parametric variation in object and goal positions, as illustrated in
Figure 2. Introducing this parametric variability not only creates a substantially larger (infinite)
variety of tasks, but also makes it substantially more practical to expect that a meta-trained model
will generalize to acquire entirely new tasks more quickly, since varying the positions provides for

        4

wider coverage of the space of possible manipulation tasks. Without parametric variation, the model
could for example memorize that any object at a particular location is a door, while any object
at another location is a drawer. If the locations are not fixed, this kind of memorization is much
less likely, and the model is forced to generalize more broadly. With enough tasks and variation
within tasks, pairs of qualitatively-distinct tasks are more likely to overlap, serving as a catalyst for
generalization. For example, closing a drawer and pushing a block can appear as nearly the same
task for some initial and goal positions of each object.
Note that this kind of parametric variation, which we introduce for each task, essentially represents
the entirety of the task distribution for previous meta-RL evaluations [10, 22], which test on single
tasks (e.g., running towards a goal) with parametric variability (e.g., variation in the goal position).
Our full task distribution is therefore substantially broader, since it includes this parametric variabil-
ity for each of the 50 tasks.
To provide shared structure, the 50 environments require the same robotic arm to interact with
different objects, with different shapes, joints, and connectivity. The tasks themselves require the
robot to execute a combination of reaching, pushing, and grasping, depending on the task. By
recombining these basic behavioral building blocks with a variety of objects with different shapes
and articulation properties, we can create a wide range of manipulation tasks. For example, the
open door task involves pushing or grasping an object with a revolute joint, while the open drawer
task requires pushing or grasping an object with a sliding joint. More complex tasks require a
combination of these building blocks, which must be executed in the right order. We visualize all of
the tasks in Meta-World in Figure 1, and include a description of all tasks in Appendix A.
All of the tasks are implemented in the MuJoCo physics engine [53], which enables fast simulation
of physical contact. To make the interface simple and accessible, we base our suite on the Multiworld
interface [54] and the OpenAI Gym environment interfaces [11], making additions and adaptations
of the suite relatively easy for researchers already familiar with Gym.

4.2 Actions, Observations, and Rewards
In order to represent policies for multiple tasks with one model, the observation and action spaces
must contain significant shared structure across tasks. All of our tasks are performed by a simulated
Sawyer robot. The action space is a 2-tuple consisting of the change in 3D space of the end-effector
followed by a normalized torque that the gripper fingers should apply. The actions in this space range
between −1 and 1. For all tasks, the robot must either manipulate one object with a variable goal
position, or manipulate two objects with a fixed goal position. The observation space is represented
as a 6-tuple of the 3D Cartesian positions of the end-effector, a normalized measurement of how
open the gripper is, the 3D position of the first object, the quaternion of the first object, the 3D
position of the second object, the quaternion of the second object, all of the previous measurements
in the environment, and finally the 3D position of the goal. If there is no second object or the goal
is not meant to be included in the observation, then the quantities corresponding to them are zeroed
out. The observation space is always 39 dimensional.
Designing reward functions for Meta-World requires two major considerations. First, to guarantee
that our tasks are within the reach of current single-task reinforcement learning algorithms, which
is a prerequisite for evaluating multi-task and meta-RL algorithms, we design well-shaped reward
functions for each task that make each of the tasks at least individually solvable. More importantly,
the reward functions must exhibit shared structure across tasks. Critically, even if the reward func-
tion admits the same optimal policy for multiple tasks, varying reward scales or structures can make
the tasks appear completely distinct for the learning algorithm, masking their shared structure and
leading to preferences for tasks with high-magnitude rewards [8]. Accordingly, we adopt a struc-
tured, multi-component reward function for all tasks, which leads to effective policy learning for
each of the task components. For instance, in a task that involves a combination of reaching, grasp-
ing, and placing an object, let o ∈ R3 be the object position, where o = (ox, oy, oz), h ∈ R3 be the
position of the robot’s gripper, ztarget ∈ R be the target height of lifting the object, and g ∈ R3 be
goal position. With the above definition, the multi-component reward function R is the combination
of a reaching reward, a grasping reward, and a placing reward or subsets thereof for simpler tasks
that only involve reaching and/or pushing. With this design, the reward functions across all tasks
have a similar magnitude that ranges between 0 and 10, where 10 always corresponds to the reward-
function being solved, and conform to similar structure, as desired. The full form of the reward
function and a list of all task rewards is provided in Appendix E.

        5

Figure 3: Visualization of three of our multi-task and meta-learning evaluation protocols, ranging from within
task adaptation in ML1, to multi-task training across 10 distinct task families in MT10, to adapting to new tasks
in ML10. Our most challenging evaluation mode ML45 is shown in Figure 1.

4.3 Evaluation Protocol
With the goal of providing a challenging benchmark to facilitate progress in multi-task RL and
meta-RL, we design an evaluation protocol with varying levels of difficulty, ranging from the level
of current goal-centric meta-RL benchmarks to a setting where methods must learn distinctly new,
challenging manipulation tasks based on diverse experience across 45 tasks. We hence divide our
evaluation into five categories, which we describe next. We then detail our evaluation criteria.
Meta-Learning 1 (ML1): Few-shot adaptation to goal variation within one task. The simplest
evaluation aims to verify that previous meta-RL algorithms can adapt to new object or goal con-
figurations on only one type of task. ML1 uses single Meta-World Tasks, with the meta-training
“tasks” corresponding to 50 random initial object and goal positions, and meta-testing on 50 held-
out positions. This resembles the evaluations in prior works [10, 22]. We evaluate algorithms on
three individual tasks from Meta-World: reaching, pushing, and pick and place, where the varia-
tion is over reaching position or goal object position. The goal positions are not provided in the
observation, forcing meta-RL algorithms to adapt to the goal through trial-and-error.
Multi-Task 1 (MT1): Learning one multi-task policy that generalizes to 50 tasks belonging
to the same environment. This evaluation aims to verify how well multi-task algorithms can learn
across a large related task distribution. MT1 uses single Meta-World environments, with the training
“tasks” corresponding to 50 random initial object and goal positions. The goal positions are provided
in the observation and are a fixed set, as to focus on the ability of algorithms in acquiring a distinct
skill across multiple goals, rather than generalization and robustness.
Multi-Task 10, Multi-Task 50 (MT10, MT50): Learning one multi-task policy that generalizes
to 50 tasks belonging to 10 and 50 training environments, for a total of 500, and 2,500 training
tasks. A first step towards adapting quickly to distinctly new tasks is the ability to train a single pol-
icy that can solve multiple distinct training tasks. The multi-task evaluation in Meta-World tests the
ability to learn multiple tasks at once, without accounting for generalization to new tasks. The MT10
evaluation uses 10 environments: reach, push, pick and place, open door, open drawer, close drawer,
press button top-down, insert peg side, open window, and open box. The larger MT50 evaluation
uses all 50 Meta-World environments. In our experiments, the algorithm is typically provided with
a one-hot vector indicating the current task. The positions of objects and goal positions are fixed in
all tasks in this evaluation, so as to focus on acquiring the distinct skills, rather than generalization
and robustness.
Meta-Learning 10, Meta-Learning 45 (ML10, ML45): Few-shot adaptation to new test tasks
with 10 and 50 meta-training tasks. With the objective to test generalization to new tasks, we hold

        6

out 5 tasks and meta-train policies on 10 and 45 tasks. We randomize object and goals positions
and intentionally select training tasks with structural similarity to the test tasks. Task IDs are not
provided as input, requiring a meta-RL algorithm to identify the tasks from experience.
Success metrics. Since values of reward are not directly indicative how successful a policy is, we
define an interpretable success metric for each task, which will be used as the evaluation criterion
for all of the above evaluation settings. Since all of our tasks involve manipulating one or more
objects into a goal configuration, this success metric is typically based on the distance between the
task-relevant object and its final goal pose, i.e. ‖o − g‖2 < , where is a small distance threshold
such as 5 cm. For the complete list of success metrics and thresholds for each task, see Appendix 12.

5 Experimental Results and Analysis
The first, most basic goal of our experiments is to verify that each of the 50 presented tasks are indeed
solveable by existing single-task reinforcement learning algorithms. We provide this verification
in Appendix B. Beyond verifying the individual tasks, the goals of our experiments are to study
the following questions: (1) can existing state-of-the-art meta-learning algorithms quickly learn
qualitatively new tasks when meta-trained on a sufficiently broad, yet structured task distribution,
and (2) how do different multi-task and meta-learning algorithms compare in this setting? To answer
these questions, we evaluate various multi-task and meta-learning algorithms on the Meta-World
benchmark. We include the training curves of all evaluations in Figure 15 in the Appendix C.
Videos of the tasks and evaluations, along with all source code, are on the project webpage3.
In the multi-task evaluation, we evaluate the following RL algorithms: multi-task proximal policy
optimization (PPO) [55]: a policy gradient algorithm adapted to the multi-task setting by provid-
ing the one-hot task ID as input, multi-task trust region policy optimization (TRPO) [56]: an
on-policy policy gradient algorithm adapted to the multi-task setting using the one-hot task ID as
input, multi-task soft actor-critic (SAC) [57]: an off-policy actor-critic algorithm adapted to the
multi-task setting using the one-hot task ID as input, and an on-policy version of task embeddings
(TE) [58]: a multi-task reinforcement learning algorithm that parameterizes the learned policies
via shared skill embedding space. For the meta-RL evaluation, we study three algorithms: RL2
[18, 19]: an on-policy meta-RL algorithm that corresponds to training a GRU network with hid-
den states maintained across episodes within a task and trained with PPO, model-agnostic meta-
learning (MAML) [10, 21]: an on-policy gradient-based meta-RL algorithm that embeds policy
gradient steps into the meta-optimization, and is trained with PPO, and probabilistic embeddings
for actor-critic RL (PEARL) [22]: an off-policy actor-critic meta-RL algorithm, which learns to
encode experience into a probabilistic embedding of the task that is fed to the actor and the critic.
We use the baselines in the Garage [59] reinforcement learning library, which we developed for
benchmarking Meta-World.
We show results of the simplest meta-learning evaluation mode, ML1, in Figure 4. We find that
there is room for improvement even in this very simple setting. Next, we look at results of multi-
task learning across distinct tasks, starting with MT10 in Figure 5 and in Table 1.
We find that multi-task SAC is able to the learn the MT10 task suite well, achieving around 68%
success rate averaged across tasks, while multi-task PPO and TRPO are only able to achieve around
a 30% success rate. However, as we scale to 50 distict tasks with MT50, we find that MT-SAC and
MT-PPO only achieve around a 35-38% success rate, indicating that there is significant room for
improvement in these methods
Finally, we study the ML10 and ML45 meta-learning benchmarks, which require learning the meta-
training tasks and generalizing to new meta-test tasks with small amounts of experience. From
Figure 8 and Table 1, we find that the prior meta-RL methods, MAML and RL2 reach 35% and
31% success on ML10 test tasks, while PEARL achieves only 13% on ML10. On ML45, MAML
and RL2 solve around 39.9% and 33.3% of the meta-test tasks. Note that, on both ML10 and
ML45, the meta-training performance of all methods also has considerable room for improvement,
suggesting that optimization challenges are generally more severe in the meta-learning setting. The
fact that some methods nonetheless exhibit meaningful generalization suggests that the ML10 and
ML45 benchmarks are solvable, but challenging for current methods, leaving considerable room for
improvement in future work.

   3Videos are on the project webpage, at meta-world.github.io

        7

    ML-1 Maximum Success Rates (N=10)

                                     MAML-TRPO
reach-v2                             RL2-PPO
                                     PEARL

 push-v2


pick-place-v2

     reach-v2    SuccessRate


    push-v2


    pick-place-v2

        0      20               40  60      80 100
                                Success Rate

    Figure 4: Comparison on our simplest meta-RL evaluation, ML1 on 10 seeds. RL² shows the strongest per-
    formance in generalization. Pearl shows the weakest performance, though this could be attributed to difficulty
    in training its task encoder




    MT-10 Maximum Per-Task Success Rates (N=10)
                                                                            MT-SAC
                    Average                                                 MT-PPO
                                                                            TE-PPO
                                                                            MT-TRPO
            window-close-v2

             window-open-v2

               door-open-v2

         peg-insert-side-v2

             drawer-open-v2

              pick-place-v2

                   reach-v2

    button-press-topdown-v2

                    push-v2

            drawer-close-v2

        0      20                               40 60                 80 100
                                                Success Rate
    Figure 5: Performance of the tested MTRL algorithms on 10 seeds.  MT-SAC performs the best
    on MT-10, exhibiting the greatest sample efficiency and performance. For detailed plots of these
    algorithm’s learning curves, see appendix C.

                                                8










Environment      Test Environment               Train Environment

    ML-10 Maximum Per-Task Success Rates (N=10)

                Average                    RL2-PPO
                                           MAML-TRPO
                                           PEARL
     peg-insert-side-v2

               reach-v2

           door-open-v2

          basketball-v2

         window-open-v2

          pick-place-v2

button-press-topdown-v2

                push-v2

        drawer-close-v2

               sweep-v2
                Average    SuccessRate
          door-close-v2
         shelf-place-v2
         drawer-open-v2
          sweep-into-v2
          lever-pull-v2

        0      20          40 60     80 100
                           Success Rate


Figure 6: Performance of the tested meta-RL algorithms on 10 seeds. RL2 shows the highest perfor-
mance on the training tasks (86.9%), however its ability to generalize is not that much greater than
MAML (35.8% for RL2 and 31.6% for MAML).










    9










Test Environment  Train Environment

    MT-50 Maximum Per-Task Success Rates (N=10)
                         Average                                   MT-SAC
                                                                   MT-PPO
              pick-place-wall-v2                                   TE-PPO
                                                                   MT-TRPO
                    dial-turn-v2
                   door-close-v2
                  shelf-place-v2
                   reach-wall-v2
                    push-back-v2
             pick-out-of-hole-v2
                    push-wall-v2
                         push-v2
                  handle-pull-v2
                       soccer-v2
                   sweep-into-v2
                   pick-place-v2
                 button-press-v2
                  disassemble-v2
                  plate-slide-v2
                    box-close-v2
              peg-unplug-side-v2
            handle-press-side-v2
                  window-open-v2
                coffee-button-v2
    handle-press-v2
                  drawer-open-v2
              peg-insert-side-v2
                        reach-v2
                 window-close-v2
             handle-pull-side-v2
                    door-open-v2
                   lever-pull-v2
                  faucet-open-v2
         button-press-topdown-v2
                  bin-picking-v2
                    door-lock-v2
            button-press-wall-v2
             plate-slide-side-v2
             plate-slide-back-v2
                     assembly-v2
    button-press-topdown-wall-v2
                 drawer-close-v2
                 faucet-close-v2
                       hammer-v2
                  coffee-push-v2
                   stick-push-v2
                  coffee-pull-v2
                   basketball-v2
        plate-slide-back-side-v2
                  hand-insert-v2
                  door-unlock-v2
                        sweep-v2
                   stick-pull-v2

        0      20                   40  60      80      100
                                    Success Rate
    Figure 7: Performance of the tested MTRL algorithms on 10 seeds. In MT-10, MT-SAC showed the
    highest performance, however its performance does not scale to MT-50, the more difficult bench-
    mark. MT-PPO exhibits the better performance in this benchmark.


    10










Environment

    ML-45 Maximum Per-Task Success Rates (N=10)
                     Average                      RL2-PPO
               basketball-v2                      MAML-TRPO
                                                  PEARL
                    sweep-v2
              shelf-place-v2
                 assembly-v2
             faucet-close-v2
                door-open-v2
               pick-place-v2
          pick-place-wall-v2
               door-close-v2
    faucet-open-v2
              coffee-push-v2
              plate-slide-v2
               stick-push-v2
               sweep-into-v2
                   hammer-v2
               lever-pull-v2
          peg-unplug-side-v2
              handle-pull-v2
          peg-insert-side-v2
               reach-wall-v2
        handle-press-side-v2
    plate-slide-side-v2
            coffee-button-v2
                     push-v2
         handle-pull-side-v2
     button-press-topdown-v2
         pick-out-of-hole-v2
        button-press-wall-v2
               stick-pull-v2
             handle-press-v2
                    reach-v2
                dial-turn-v2
             button-press-v2
             drawer-close-v2
              window-open-v2
         plate-slide-back-v2
                   soccer-v2
              coffee-pull-v2
                push-wall-v2
    plate-slide-back-side-v2
              disassemble-v2
              drawer-open-v2
                push-back-v2
             window-close-v2
button-press-topdown-wall-v2
                     Average    SuccessRate
              bin-picking-v2
              door-unlock-v2
              hand-insert-v2
    door-lock-v2
                box-close-v2
        0      20               40  60      80 100
                                Success Rate


Figure 8: Average of maximum success rate for ML-45. Note that, even on the challenging ML-45 benchmark,
current methods already exhibit some degree of generalization, but meta-training performance leaves consider-
able room for improvement, suggesting that future work could attain better performance on these benchmarks.
Though PEARL has week training performance, it has comparable performance on test tasks. RL² has the
highest We also show the max average success rates for all benchmarks in Table 1.




    11










Test Environment    Train Environment

    Methods       MT10    MT50  Methods      ML10                            ML45
 Multi-task PPO   30.5%   35.4%       meta-train     meta-test           meta-train       meta-test
Multi-task TRPO   31.3%   21.0%   MAML  44.4%        31.6%               40.7%              39.9%
Task embeddings   20.9%   11.8%        2
 Multi-task SAC   68.3%   38.5%    RL   86.9%        35.8%               70%                33.3%
                                 PEARL  23.2%        13%                 14.5%               22%
Table 1: The average maximum success rate over all tasks for MT10, MT50, ML10, and ML45 on 10 seeds.
The best performance in each benchmark is bolden.           For MT10 and MT50, we show the average training
success rate of multi-task SAC and multi-task PPO respectively outperform other methods. For ML10 and
ML45, we show the meta-train and meta-test success rates. RL² achieves best meta-train performance in ML10
and ML45, while MAML and RL2 get the best generalization performance in ML10 and ML45 meta-test tasks
respectively.

6 Conclusion and Directions for Future Work
We proposed an open-source benchmark for meta-reinforcement learning and multi-task learning,
which consists of a large number of simulated robotic manipulation tasks.
Unlike previous evaluation benchmarks in meta-RL, our benchmark specifically emphasizes gener-
alization to distinctly new tasks, not just in terms of parametric variation in goals, but completely
new objects and interaction scenarios.
While meta-RL can in principle make it feasible for agents to acquire new skills more quickly by
leveraging past experience, previous evaluation benchmarks utilize very narrow task distributions,
making it difficult to understand the degree to which meta-RL actually enables this kind of general-
ization. The aim of our benchmark is to make it possible to develop new meta-RL algorithms that
actually exhibit this sort of generalization. Our experiments show that current meta-RL methods in
fact cannot yet generalize effectively to entirely new tasks and do not even learn the meta-training
tasks effectively when meta-trained across multiple distinct tasks. This suggests a number of direc-
tions for future work, which we describe below.
Future directions for algorithm design.                The main conclusion from our experimental evaluation
with our proposed benchmark is that current meta-RL algorithms generally struggle in settings where
the meta-training tasks are highly diverse. This issue mirrors the challenges observed in multi-task
RL, which is also challenging with our task suite, and has been observed to require considerable ad-
ditional algorithmic development to attain good results in prior work [9, 15, 16]. A number of recent
works have studied algorithmic improvements in the area of multi-task reinforcement learning, as
well as potential explanations for the difficulty of RL in the multi-task setting [8, 60]. Incorporat-
ing some of these methods into meta-RL, as well as developing new techniques to enable meta-RL
algorithms to train on broader task distributions, would be a promising direction for future work
to enable meta-RL methods to generalize effectively across diverse tasks, and our proposed bench-
mark suite can provide future algorithms development with a useful gauge of progress towards the
eventual goal of broad task generalization.
Future extensions of the benchmark.                  While the presented benchmark is significantly broader
and more challenging than existing evaluations of meta-reinforcement learning algorithms, there
are a number of extensions to the benchmark that would continue to improve and expand upon its
applicability to realistic robotics tasks. First, in many situations, the poses of objects are not directly
accessible to a robot in the real world. Hence, one interesting and important direction for future
work is to consider image observations and sparse rewards. Sparse rewards can be derived already
using the success metrics, while support for image rendering is already supported by the code.
However, for meta-learning algorithms, special care needs to be taken to ensure that the task cannot
be inferred directly from the image, else meta-learning algorithms will memorize the training tasks
rather than learning to adapt. Another natural extension would be to consider including a breadth
of compositional long-horizon tasks, where there exist combinatorial numbers of tasks. Such tasks
would be a straightforward extension, and provide the possibility to include many more tasks with
shared structure. Another challenge when deploying robot learning and meta-learning algorithms is
the manual effort of resetting the environment. To simulate this case, one simple extension of the
benchmark is to significantly reduce the frequency of resets available to the robot while learning.
Lastly, in many real-world situations, the tasks are not available all at once. To reflect this challenge
in the benchmark, we can add an evaluation protocol that matches that of online meta-learning
problem statements [61]. We leave these directions for future work, either to be done by ourselves

                              12

or in the form of open-source contributions. To summarize, we believe that the proposed form of the
task suite represents a significant step towards evaluating multi-task and meta-learning algorithms
on diverse robotic manipulation problems that will pave the way for future research in these areas.
Acknowledgments
We thank Suraj Nair for feedback on a draft of the paper. We thank K.R Zentner for her help in
maintaining Meta-World. This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under IIS-1651843, IIS-1700697, and IIS-1700696, the Office of Naval Research, ARL DCIST CRA
W911NF-17-2-0181, DARPA, Google, Amazon, and NVIDIA.

References
 [1] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies.
     Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2016.
 [2] K. M¨ulling, J. Kober, O. Kroemer, and J. Peters. Learning to select and generalize striking
     movements in robot table tennis. IJRR, 2013.
 [3] M. Andrychowicz, B. Baker, M. Chociej, R. Jozefowicz, B. McGrew, J. Pachocki,
     A. Petron, M. Plappert, G. Powell, A. Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation.
     arXiv:1808.00177, 2018.
 [4] Y. Chebotar, K. Hausman, M. Zhang, G. Sukhatme, S. Schaal, and S. Levine. Combining
     model-based and model-free updates for trajectory-centric reinforcement learning. In ICML,
     2017.
 [5] L. Manuelli, W. Gao, P. R. Florence, and R. Tedrake. kpam: Keypoint affordances for category-
     level robotic manipulation. CoRR, abs/1903.06684, 2019.
 [6] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
     neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012.
 [7] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional
     transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018.
 [8] M. Hessel, H. Soyer, L. Espeholt, W. Czarnecki, S. Schmitt, and H. van Hasselt. Multi-task
     deep reinforcement learning with popart. CoRR, abs/1809.04474, 2018.
 [9] E. Parisotto, J. L. Ba, and R. Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer rein-
     forcement learning. arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.
[10] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
     networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
[11] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba.
     Openai gym. arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[12] K. Cobbe, O. Klimov, C. Hesse, T. Kim, and J. Schulman. Quantifying generalization in
     reinforcement learning. arXiv:1812.02341, 2018.
[13] Y. Tassa, Y. Doron, A. Muldal, T. Erez, Y. Li, D. d. L. Casas, D. Budden, A. Abdolmaleki,
     J. Merel, A. Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.
[14] M. C. Machado, M. G. Bellemare, E. Talvitie, J. Veness, M. J. Hausknecht, and M. Bowl-
     ing. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for
     general agents. CoRR, abs/1709.06009, 2017.
[15] A. A. Rusu, S. G. Colmenarejo, C. Gulcehre, G. Desjardins, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu,
     V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, and R. Hadsell. Policy distillation. arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.
[16] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih, T. Ward, Y. Doron, V. Firoiu,
     T. Harley, I. Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted
     actor-learner architectures. arXiv:1802.01561, 2018.
[17] S. Sharma and B. Ravindran. Online multi-task learning using active sampling. 2017.
[18] Y. Duan, J. Schulman, X. Chen, P. L. Bartlett, I. Sutskever, and P. Abbeel. Rl$ˆ2$: Fast
     reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.02779, 2016.
[19] J. X. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, D. Tirumala, H. Soyer, J. Z. Leibo, R. Munos, C. Blundell,
     D. Kumaran, and M. Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn, 2016. arXiv:1611.05763.
[20] N. Mishra, M. Rohaninejad, X. Chen, and P. Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner.
     arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.
[21] J. Rothfuss, D. Lee, I. Clavera, T. Asfour, and P. Abbeel. Promp: Proximal meta-policy search.
     arXiv:1810.06784, 2018.
[22] K. Rakelly, A. Zhou, D. Quillen, C. Finn, and S. Levine. Efficient off-policy meta-
     reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. arXiv:1903.08254, 2019.

        13

[23] C. Fernando, J. Sygnowski, S. Osindero, J. Wang, T. Schaul, D. Teplyashin, P. Sprechmann,
     A. Pritzel, and A. Rusu. Meta-learning by the baldwin effect. In Proceedings of the Genetic
     and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pages 1313–1320. ACM, 2018.
[24] S. Ritter, J. X. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, S. M. Jayakumar, C. Blundell, R. Pascanu, and
     M. Botvinick. Been there, done that: Meta-learning with episodic recall. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1805.09692, 2018.
[25] A. Nichol, V. Pfau, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, and J. Schulman. Gotta learn fast: A new benchmark
     for generalization in rl. arXiv:1804.03720, 2018.
[26] A. Nagabandi, I. Clavera, S. Liu, R. S. Fearing, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Learn-
     ing to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-reinforcement learning.
     arXiv:1803.11347, 2018.
[27] S. Sæmundsson, K. Hofmann, and M. P. Deisenroth. Meta reinforcement learning with latent
     variable gaussian processes. arXiv:1803.07551, 2018.
[28] B. Calli, A. Walsman, A. Singh, S. Srinivasa, P. Abbeel, and A. M. Dollar. Benchmark-
     ing in manipulation research: The ycb object and model set and benchmarking protocols.
     arXiv:1502.03143, 2015.
[29] Y. Lee, E. S. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Yin, and J. J. Lim. IKEA furniture assembly environment
     for long-horizon complex manipulation tasks. CoRR, abs/1911.07246, 2019. URL http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/1911.07246.
[30] S. James, Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark and
     learning environment, 2019.
[31] I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena. Deep learning for detecting robotic grasps. IJRR, 2015.
[32] C. Finn, I. Goodfellow, and S. Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction through
     video prediction. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 64–72, 2016.
[33] K.-T. Yu, M. Bauza, N. Fazeli, and A. Rodriguez. More than a million ways to be pushed. a
     high-fidelity experimental dataset of planar pushing. In IROS, 2016.
[34] Y. Chebotar, K. Hausman, Z. Su, A. Molchanov, O. Kroemer, G. Sukhatme, and S. Schaal.
     Bigs: Biotac grasp stability dataset. In ICRA 2016 Workshop on Grasping and Manipulation
     Datasets, 2016.
[35] A. Gupta, A. Murali, D. P. Gandhi, and L. Pinto. Robot learning in homes: Improving gen-
     eralization and reducing dataset bias. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     pages 9112–9122, 2018.
[36] A. Mandlekar, Y. Zhu, A. Garg, J. Booher, M. Spero, A. Tung, J. Gao, J. Emmons, A. Gupta,
     E. Orbay, et al. Roboturk: A crowdsourcing platform for robotic skill learning through imita-
     tion. arXiv:1811.02790, 2018.
[37] P. Sharma, L. Mohan, L. Pinto, and A. Gupta. Multiple interactions made easy (mime): Large
     scale demonstrations data for imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07121, 2018.
[38] N. Correll, K. E. Bekris, D. Berenson, O. Brock, A. Causo, K. Hauser, K. Okada, A. Rodriguez,
     J. M. Romano, and P. R. Wurman. Analysis and observations from the first amazon picking
     challenge. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 15(1):172–188, 2016.
[39] B. Calli, A. Singh, A. Walsman, S. Srinivasa, P. Abbeel, and A. M. Dollar. The ycb object
     and model set: Towards common benchmarks for manipulation research. In International
     Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR), 2015.
[40] Y. S. Choi, T. Deyle, T. Chen, J. D. Glass, and C. C. Kemp. A list of household objects for
     robotic retrieval prioritized by people with als. In International Conference on Rehabilitation
     Robotics, 2009.
[41] M. Savva, A. Kadian, O. Maksymets, Y. Zhao, E. Wijmans, B. Jain, J. Straub, J. Liu, V. Koltun,
     J. Malik, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. arXiv:1904.01201, 2019.
[42] E. Kolve, R. Mottaghi, D. Gordon, Y. Zhu, A. Gupta, and A. Farhadi. Ai2-thor: An interactive
     3d environment for visual ai. arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
[43] S. Brodeur, E. Perez, A. Anand, F. Golemo, L. Celotti, F. Strub, J. Rouat, H. Larochelle, and
     A. Courville. Home: A household multimodal environment. arXiv:1711.11017, 2017.
[44] M. Savva, A. X. Chang, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Funkhouser, and V. Koltun. Minos: Multimodal
     indoor simulator for navigation in complex environments. arXiv:1712.03931, 2017.
[45] F. Xia, A. R. Zamir, Z. He, A. Sax, J. Malik, and S. Savarese. Gibson env: Real-world percep-
     tion for embodied agents. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
[46] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun. Carla: An open urban driving
     simulator. arXiv:1711.03938, 2017.

        14

[47] B. Wymann, E. Espi´e, C. Guionneau, C. Dimitrakakis, R. Coulom, and A. Sumner. Torcs, the
     open racing car simulator. Software available at http://torcs. sourceforge. net, 4(6), 2000.
[48] S. R. Richter, Z. Hayder, and V. Koltun. Playing for benchmarks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
     International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2213–2222, 2017.
[49] D. Kappler, J. Bohg, and S. Schaal. Leveraging big data for grasp planning. In 2015 IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4304–4311. IEEE, 2015.
[50] A. Kasper, Z. Xue, and R. Dillmann. The kit object models database: An object model database
     for object recognition, localization and manipulation in service robotics. IJRR, 2012.
[51] C. Goldfeder, M. Ciocarlie, H. Dang, and P. K. Allen. The columbia grasp database. 2008.
[52] L. Fan, Y. Zhu, J. Zhu, Z. Liu, O. Zeng, A. Gupta, J. Creus-Costa, S. Savarese, and L. Fei-Fei.
     Surreal: Open-source reinforcement learning framework and robot manipulation benchmark.
     In Conference on Robot Learning, 2018.
[53] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In
     International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
[54] A. V. Nair, V. Pong, M. Dalal, S. Bahl, S. Lin, and S. Levine. Visual reinforcement learning
     with imagined goals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
[55] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
     algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[56] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P. Moritz. Trust region policy optimization.
     In International conference on machine learning, pages 1889–1897, 2015.
[57] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy
     deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290, 2018.
[58] K. Hausman, J. T. Springenberg, Z. Wang, N. Heess, and M. Riedmiller. Learning an embed-
     ding space for transferable robot skills. International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2018.
[59] T. garage contributors. Garage: A toolkit for reproducible reinforcement learning research.
     https://github.com/rlworkgroup/garage, 2021.
[60] T. Schaul, D. Borsa, J. Modayil, and R. Pascanu. Ray interference: a source of plateaus in
     deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11455, 2019.
[61] C. Finn, A. Rajeswaran, S. Kakade, and S. Levine. Online meta-learning. ICML, 2019.










    15

   5                      :
   x        g             2      3
                 §        <      :
                 8
   ©        .Q   3x   $   :      :
                                 :
                          :
  wn    |   1        |    8  |   25



  §  8  =   ;
  ]  p  :
  a  2  5
  3  5
  3  5  <  Iw  1
  :  |   £  |   2  8   \  -   H

  c
  3  E  :
  3  :  :
  -  E  3
  8  S  x  E  \
  b=  ©  i
  |   2  32  I
  :
  s  §  g
  =  §  2
  2
  o  3
  o  :
  5  ©  §
  8  |  H
  i   3  |   0.2  EH  H
  :ₐ§  3  IS  =  :
  5  3  28  =  a
  32  :  :
  |  :  |  a  H

  2  8
   ©  5  i
   —  5  2  2
  :
   c  §  8:  5  :  :
  cE
   ©  3  H  5%
   =  |  a  |   H  I  i
  23  3
  83
  i  §  :  2
  cE  &
  °
  SS  5  LEH
  EH
  |  \   8  5  2   I  i

  2
  2  a  E  :
  53  2  H
  £R  5  58  :  8
  8  3  =x  8
  3sⁱ  So  3
  |  H  |   53  an  |

  8

  =  o  :  8
  3  H  a  [=  :
  §  5   :  =
  2  3  2  5
  2  5  H  H
  o  A  a
  )  8  I  |  a  5

  H
  N  8
  2£  3  H°  ::  :
  5  3
  2  co
  El
  23
  |  é  |  |   2s  FH
  |  az |  2


                                 16










Figure 9: Enlarged image of Figure 1.

  1
  i  a
  H  3  §
  <£  3
  2
  7H
  \  \  HE  aa
  =  c
  8  8  8
  8  5  i8
  H  :
  8  =  )
  wv  =|!  i
   2  :=  2
  8  2
   3  hd  ©  §  :
  g
  |  4  |  |  2

  8
  5
  5
  H
  5  :
  I  H  |

  2  H
  3  o
  4
  a  =
  c  =  H
  S
  5
  2  I  a  \  ©5

  §
  -H
  .  H  H
  =  5₂₈ |  -  Hᴴ  gs<  VE3
  35  5   i  23
  §  ~B§  2§
  8  3  a
  of  .  o  NE i  g:  :
  3
   3  3  3:
   £  g  gg  Eg  2  <E
   ©  i
   =  FEE  |  )
  HF  g
  I  ag  $
  a  §  a
  g  §
  3%  5  <  2
  he  2  3

  a
  5 §  8  3g
  ag  a  4
  a
  el  5  ri  3  82
  2  :
  =  a  E  2
  |   3  |  a  a3 |  =

  o  o
  —  fa
  —  =  —
  3  5

  17










Figure 10: Enlarged image of Figure 3.

A     Task Descriptions
In Table 2, we include a description of each of the 50 Meta-World tasks.

 Task                    Description
 turn on faucet          Rotate the faucet counter-clockwise. Randomize faucet positions
 sweep                   Sweep a puck off the table. Randomize puck positions
 assemble nut            Pick up a nut and place it onto a peg. Randomize nut and peg positions
 turn off faucet         Rotate the faucet clockwise. Randomize faucet positions
 push                    Push the puck to a goal. Randomize puck and goal positions
 pull lever              Pull a lever down 90 degrees. Randomize lever positions
 turn dial               Rotate a dial 180 degrees. Randomize dial positions
 push with stick         Grasp a stick and push a box using the stick. Randomize stick positions.
 get coffee              Push a button on the coffee machine. Randomize the position of the coffee machine
 pull handle side        Pull a handle up sideways. Randomize the handle positions
 basketball              Dunk the basketball into the basket. Randomize basketball and basket positions
 pull with stick         Grasp a stick and pull a box with the stick. Randomize stick positions
 sweep into hole         Sweep a puck into a hole. Randomize puck positions
 disassemble nut         pick a nut out of the a peg. Randomize the nut positions
 place onto shelf        pick and place a puck onto a shelf. Randomize puck and shelf positions
 push mug                Push a mug under a coffee machine. Randomize the mug and the machine positions
 press handle side       Press a handle down sideways. Randomize the handle positions
 hammer                  Hammer a screw on the wall. Randomize the hammer and the screw positions
 slide plate             Slide a plate into a cabinet. Randomize the plate and cabinet positions
 slide plate side        Slide a plate into a cabinet sideways. Randomize the plate and cabinet positions
 press button wall       Bypass a wall and press a button. Randomize the button positions
 press handle            Press a handle down. Randomize the handle positions
 pull handle             Pull a handle up. Randomize the handle positions
 soccer                  Kick a soccer into the goal. Randomize the soccer and goal positions
 retrieve plate side     Get a plate from the cabinet sideways. Randomize plate and cabinet positions
 retrieve plate          Get a plate from the cabinet. Randomize plate and cabinet positions
 close drawer            Push and close a drawer. Randomize the drawer positions
 press button top        Press a button from the top. Randomize button positions
 reach                   reach a goal position. Randomize the goal positions
 press button top wall   Bypass a wall and press a button from the top. Randomize button positions
 reach with wall         Bypass a wall and reach a goal. Randomize goal positions
 insert peg side         Insert a peg sideways. Randomize peg and goal positions
 pull                    Pull a puck to a goal. Randomize puck and goal positions
 push with wall          Bypass a wall and push a puck to a goal. Randomize puck and goal positions
 pick out of hole        Pick up a puck from a hole. Randomize puck and goal positions
 pick&place w/ wall      Pick a puck, bypass a wall and place the puck. Randomize puck and goal positions
 press button            Press a button. Randomize button positions
 pick&place              Pick and place a puck to a goal. Randomize puck and goal positions
 pull mug                Pull a mug from a coffee machine. Randomize the mug and the machine positions
 unplug peg              Unplug a peg sideways. Randomize peg positions
 close window            Push and close a window. Randomize window positions
 open window             Push and open a window. Randomize window positions
 open door               Open a door with a revolving joint. Randomize door positions
 close door              Close a door with a revolving joint. Randomize door positions
 open drawer             Open a drawer. Randomize drawer positions
 insert hand             Insert the gripper into a hole.
 close box               Grasp the cover and close the box with it. Randomize the cover and box positions
 lock door               Lock the door by rotating the lock clockwise. Randomize door positions
 unlock door             Unlock the door by rotating the lock counter-clockwise. Randomize door positions
 pick bin                Grasp the puck from one bin and place it into another bin. Randomize puck positions

     Table 2: A list of all of the Meta-World tasks and a description of each task.


B Benchmark Verification with Single-Task Learning
In this section, we aim to verify that each of the benchmark tasks are individually solvable provided
enough data. To do so, we consider two state-of-the-art single task reinforcement learning methods,

                         18

        Single Task Success Rates
                   door-close-v2                                                        PPO
                   sweep-into-v2
            button-press-wall-v2                                                        SAC
         button-press-topdown-v2
                    push-back-v2
      plate-slide-v2
                coffee-button-v2
                 handle-press-v2
                  window-open-v2
                   reach-wall-v2
                 drawer-close-v2
              peg-insert-side-v2
                    dial-turn-v2
            handle-press-side-v2
                 button-press-v2
        plate-slide-back-side-v2
                        reach-v2
             plate-slide-side-v2
                  coffee-push-v2
                  door-unlock-v2
             plate-slide-back-v2
                       soccer-v2
                   basketball-v2
                    door-open-v2
                  drawer-open-v2
    button-press-topdown-wall-v2
                        sweep-v2
                    push-wall-v2
                 window-close-v2
             handle-pull-side-v2
                  hand-insert-v2
                   pick-place-v2
                    door-lock-v2
                   stick-push-v2
                  handle-pull-v2
                         push-v2
              peg-unplug-side-v2
                  coffee-pull-v2
                   lever-pull-v2
                 faucet-close-v2
                   stick-pull-v2
             pick-out-of-hole-v2
                  shelf-place-v2
                  faucet-open-v2
                       hammer-v2
                    box-close-v2
                  bin-picking-v2
                     assembly-v2
                  disassemble-v2
              pick-place-wall-v2
        0.0     0.2                                0.4 0.6     0.8 1.0
                                                   Success Rate
    Figure 11: Performance of independent policies trained on individual tasks using soft actor-critic
    (SAC) and proximal policy optimization (PPO) on 3 seeds. We verify that SAC can solve all of the
    tasks and PPO can also solve most of the tasks.
    proximal policy optimization (PPO) [55] and soft actor-critic (SAC) [57]. This evaluation is purely
    for validation of the tasks, and not an official evaluation protocol of the benchmark. Details of
    the hyperparameters are provided in Appendix D. The results of this experiment are illustrated in
    Figure 11. We indeed find that SAC can learn to perform all of the 50 tasks to some degree, while
    PPO can solve a large majority of the tasks.

    C Learning curves
    In evaluating meta-learning algorithms, we care not just about performance but also about efficiency,
    i.e. the amount of data required by the meta-training process. While the adaptation process for all
    algorithms is extremely efficient, requiring only a few trajectories, the meta-learning process can be
    very inefficient. In Figure 12, we show full learning curves of the three meta-learning methods on
    ML1. In Figure 15, we show full learning curves of MT10, ML10, MT50 and ML45. The MT10 and

        19










Environment

MT50 learning curves show the efficiency of multi-task learning, a critical evaluation metric, since
sample efficiency gains are a primary motivation for using multi-task learning. Unsurprisingly, we
find that off-policy algorithms such as soft actor-critic are able to learn with substantially less data
than on-policy algorithms.


        Seed Sensitivity on ML1 reach-v2 (n = 10)
 100     MAML-TRPO
         RL2-PPO
  80     PEARL

  60

  40

  20

   0
 100



    0
     0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0    2.5 3.0
 Total Environment Steps        1e8

    Figure 12: Comparison of PEARL, MAML, and RL2 learning curves on ML-1 reach.



        Seed Sensitivity on ML1 push-v2 (n = 10)
 100     MAML-TRPO
  80     RL2-PPO
         PEARL

  60

  40

  20

   0
 100



    0
     0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5     2.0    2.5 3.0
     Total Environment Steps        1e8

Figure 13: Comparison of PEARL, MAML, and RL2 learning curves on ML-1 push.

                                     20










Test  Success Rate (%)    Success Rate (%)
      Train        Test    Train

        Seed Sensitivity on ML1 pick-place-v2 (n = 10)
 100     MAML-TRPO
  80     RL2-PPO
         PEARL

  60

  40

  20

   0
 100



    0
        0.0     0.5    1.0 1.5                2.0    2.5 3.0
                          Total Environment Steps        1e8

        2
    Figure 14: Comparison of PEARL, MAML, and RL learning curves on the simplest evaluation,
    ML-1, where the methods need to adapt quickly to new object and goal positions within the one
    meta-training task.





        Seed Sensitivity on MT-10 (n = 10)
    70                                                MT-TRPO
    60                                                TE-PPO
                                                      MT-PPO
                                                      MT-SAC
    50

    40

    30

    20

    10

     0
        0.0  0.2  0.4      0.6      0.8                   1.0
        Total Environment Steps                       1e8

    Figure 15: Comparison of MTRL algorithms on MT-10. MT-SAC vastly outperforms is on-policy
    counterparts in performance and sample efficiency.

        21










Success Rate (%)    Test  Success Rate (%)
             Train

Success Rate (%)
Test       Train    Success Rate (%)










        Seed Sensitivity on MT-50 (n = 10)

                                                                   MT-TRPO
    35                                                             TE-PPO
                                                                   MT-PPO
    30                                                             MT-SAC

    25

    20

    15

    10

     5

      0
        0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
                                        Total Environment Steps    1e8
    Figure 16: Comparison of MTRL algorithms on MT-50. MT-SAC vastly outperforms is on-policy
    counterparts in sample efficiency.  Its performance tapers off, and with more training, MT-PPO
    outperforms it.


    80    Seed Sensitivity on ML-10 (n = 10)
           MAML-TRPO
           RL2-PPO
    60     PEARL


    40


    20


     0

    20

     0
      0.0 0.5 1.0                       1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0            3.5
        Total Environment Steps                                    1e8


    Figure 17: Performance of meta-RL algorithms on ML-10. RL2 significantly outperforms other
    methods in terms of sample efficiency and performance on test tasks. MAML has better test perfor-
    mance early on, RL2 outperforms it with more training.

                                        22

    Success Rate (%)

Test    Train










        Seed Sensitivity on ML-45 (n = 10)
  70
                                   MAML-TRPO
  60                               RL2-PPO
  50                               PEARL

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0

  20

 0
   0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
        Total Environment Steps        1e8


Figure 18: Learning curves of all methods on the ML-45 benchmark. Y-axis represents success
rate averaged over tasks in percentage (%). The dashed lines represent asymptotic performances.
PEARL underperforms MAML and RL2. RL2 significantly outperforms other methods in terms of
sample efficiency and performance on train tasks. RL2 and MAML have similar performance on
test tasks.










    23

D    Hyperparameter Details
In this section, we provide hyperparameter values for each of the methods in our experimental
evaluation.
D.1  Single Task SAC

 Description              value          variable name
 Normal Hyperparameters
 Batch size               500            batch size
 Number of epochs         500            n epochs
 Path length per          500            max path length
 roll-out
 Discount factor          0.99           discount
 Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
 Policy hidden sizes      (256, 256)     hidden sizes
 Activation function of   ReLU           hidden nonlinearity
 hidden layers
 Policy learning rate     3 × 10−4       policy lr
 Q-function learning      3 × 10−4       qf lr
 rate
 Policy minimum           e−20           min std
 standard deviation
 Policy maximum           e2             max std
 standard deviation
 Gradient steps per       500            gradient steps per itr
 epoch
 Number of epoch          40             epoch cycles
 cycles
 Soft target              5 × 10−3       target update tau
 interpolation
 parameter
 Use automatic entropy    True           use automatic entropy tuning
 Tuning
     Table 3: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Single Task SAC










                          24

D.2 Single Task PPO

 Description                   value              variable name
 Normal Hyperparameters
 Batch size                    5,000              batch size
 Number of epochs              4,000              n epochs
 Path length per roll-out      500                max path length
 Discount factor               0.99               discount
 Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
 Policy mean hidden sizes      (128, 128)         hidden sizes
 Policy minimum standard       0.5                min std
 deviation
 Policy maximum standard       1.5                max std
 deviation
 Policy share standard         True               std share network
 deviation and mean
 network
 Activation function of        tanh               hidden nonlinearity
 mean hidden layers
 Optimizer learning rate       5 × 10−4           learning rate
 Likelihood ratio clip range   0.2                lr clip range
 Advantage estimation λ        0.95               gae lambda
 Use layer normalization       False              layer normalization
 Entropy method                max                entropy method
 Loss function                 surrogate˙clip     pg loss
 Maximum number of             256                max epochs
 epochs for update
 Minibatch size for            32                 batch size
 optimization
 Value Function Hyperparameters
 Policy hidden sizes           (128, 128)         hidden sizes
 Activation function of        tanh               hidden nonlinearity
 hidden layers
 Initial value for standard    1                  init std
 deviation
 Use trust region constraint   False              use trust region
 Normalize inputs              True               normalize inputs
 Normalize outputs             True               normalize outputs
     Table 4: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Single Task PPO

Below we summarize in as much detail as possible the hyperparameters used for each experiment in
this chapter. Seed values were individually chosen at random for each experiment.










                               25

D.3 MT-PPO

Description                     MT10             MT50             variable name
Normal Hyperparameters
Batch size                      100,000          500,000          batch size
Number of epochs                10,000           10,000           n epochs
Path length per roll-out        500              500              max path length
Discount factor                 0.99             0.99             discount
Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
Policy mean hidden sizes        (512, 512)       hidden sizes
Policy minimum standard         0.5              0.5              min std
deviation
Policy maximum standard         1.5              1.5              max std
deviation
Policy share standard           True             True             std share network
deviation and mean network
Activation function of hidden   tanh             tanh             hidden nonlinearity
layers
Optimizer learning rate         5 × 10−4         5 × 10−4         learning rate
Likelihood ratio clip range     0.2              0.2              lr clip range
Advantage estimation λ          0.97             0.97             gae lambda
Use layer normalization         False            False            layer normalization
Use trust region constraint     False            False            use trust region
Entropy method                  max              max              entropy method
Policy entropy coefficient      5e − 3           5e − 3           policy ent coeff
Loss function                   surrogate˙clip   surrogate˙clip   pg loss
Maximum number of epochs        16               16               max epochs
for update
Minibatch size for              32               32               batch size
optimization
Value Function Hyperparameters
Value Function hidden sizes     (512, 512)       (512, 512)       hidden sizes
Activation function of hidden   tanh             tanh             hidden nonlinearity
layers
Trainable standard deviation    True             True             learn std
Initial value for standard      1                1                init std
deviation
Use layer normalization         False            False            layer normalization
Use trust region constraint     False            False            use trust region
Normalize inputs                True             True             normalize inputs
Normalize outputs               True             True             normalize outputs
    Table 5: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Multi-Task PPO










                                26

D.4 MT-TRPO

Description                            MT10         MT50         variable name
Normal Hyperparameters
Batch size                             100,000      500,000      batch size
Number of epochs                       10,000       10,000       n epochs
Path length per roll-out               500          500          max path length
Discount factor                        0.99         0.99         discount
Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
Policy mean hidden sizes               (512, 512)   hidden sizes
Policy minimum standard deviation      0.5          0.5          min std
Policy maximum standard deviation      1.5          1.5          max std
Policy share standard deviation and    True         True         std share network
mean network
Activation function of hidden layers   tanh         tanh         hidden nonlinearity
Advantage estimation λ                 0.95         0.95         gae lambda
Maximum KL divergence                  1 × 10−2     1 × 10−2     max kl step
Number of CG iterations                10           10           cg iters
Regularization coefficient             1 × 10−5     1 × 10−5     reg coeff
Use layer normalization                False        False        layer normalization
Use trust region constraint            False        False        use trust region
Entropy method                         no˙entropy   no˙entropy   entropy method
Loss function                          surrogate    surrogate    pg loss
Value Function Hyperparameters
Hidden sizes                           (512, 512)   (512, 512)   hidden sizes
Activation function of hidden layers   tanh         tanh         hidden nonlinearity
Trainable standard deviation           True         True         learn std
Initial value for standard deviation   1            1            init std
Use layer normalization                False        False        layer normalization
Use trust region constraint            True         True         use trust region
Normalize inputs                       True         True         normalize inputs
Normalize outputs                      True         True         normalize outputs
    Table 6: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Multi-Task TRPO










                                       27

D.5 MT-SAC

Description                 MT10         MT50         variable name
General Hyperparameters
Batch size                  5,000        25,000       batch size
Number of epochs            500          500          epochs
Path length per roll-out    500          500          max path length
Discount factor             0.99         0.99         discount
Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
Policy hidden sizes         (400, 400)   (400, 400)   hidden sizes
Activation function of      ReLU         ReLU         hidden nonlinearity
hidden layers
Policy learning rate        3 × 10−4     3 × 10−4     policy lr
Q-function learning rate    3 × 10−4     3 × 10−4     qf lr
Policy minimum standard     e−20         e−20         min std
deviation
Policy maximum standard     e2           e2           max std
deviation
Gradient steps per epoch    500          500          gradient steps per itr
Number of epoch cycles      200          40           epoch cycles
Soft target interpolation   5 × 10−3     5 × 10−3     target update tau
parameter
Use automatic entropy       True         True         use automatic entropy tuning
Tuning
Minimum Buffer Batch        1500         7500         min buffer size
Size
    Table 7: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Multi-Task SAC










                            28

D.6 TE-PPO

Description                            MT10       MT50               argument name
General Hyperparameters
Batch size                             50,000     250,000            batch size
Number of epochs                       4,000      2,000              n epochs
Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
Policy hidden sizes                    (32, 16)   (32, 16)           hidden sizes
Activation function of hidden layers   tanh       tanh               hidden nonlinearity
Likelihood ratio clip range            0.2        0.2                lr clip range
Latent dimension                       4          4                  latent length
Inference window length                6          6                  inference window
Embedding maximum standard deviation   0.2        0.2                embedding max std
Policy entropy coefficient             2e −  2    2e − 2             policy ent coeff
Value function                         Gaussian MLP fit with         baseline
                                       observations, latent variables
                                       and returns
    Table 8: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with Task Embeddings PPO










                                       29

   D.7 MAML

   Description                ML1          ML10         ML45         argument name
   Meta-/Multi-Task Hyperparameters
   Meta-batch size            20           20           45           meta batch size
   Roll-outs per task         10           10           20           rollouts per task
   General Hyperparameters
   Path length per roll-out   500          500          500          max path length
   Discount factor            0.99         0.99         0.99         discount
   Algorithm-specific
   Hyperparameters
   Policy hidden sizes        (128, 128)   (128, 128)   (128, 128)   hidden sizes
   Activation function of     tanh         tanh         tanh         hidden nonlinearity
   hidden layers
   Activation function of     tanh         tanh         tanh         output nonlinearity
   output layer
   Inner algorithm learning   1 × 10−4     1 ×   −4     1 × 10−4     inner lr
                                                 10
   rate
   Optimizer learning rate    1 × 10−3     1 ×   −3     1 × 10−3     outer lr
       10
Maximum KL divergence 1 × 10−2 1 × −2 1 × 10−2 max kl step
       10
   Number of inner gradient   1            1            1            num grad update
updates
Policy entropy coefficient 5 × 10−5 5 × −5 5 × 10−5 policy ent coeff
       10
       Table 9: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with MAML










                                           30

   D.8 RL2

   Description                   ML1        ML10         ML45                            argument name
   Meta-/Multi-Task Hyperparameters
   Meta-batch size               25         10           25                              meta batch size
   Roll-outs per task            10         10           10                              rollouts per task
   General Hyperparameters
   Path length per roll-out      500        500          500                             max path length
   Discount factor               0.99       0.99         0.99                            discount
   Algorithm-Specific Hyperparameters
   Policy hidden sizes           (256, )    (256, )      (256, )                         hidden sizes
   Activation function of        tanh       tanh         tanh                            hidden nonlinearity
   hidden layers
   Activation function of        sigmoid    sigmoid      sigmoid                         recurrent nonlinearity
   recurrent layers
   Optimizer learning rate       5 × 10−4   5 ×     −4   5 × 10−4                        optimizer lr
                                                   10
   Likelihood ratio clip range   0.2        0.2          0.2                             lr clip range
   Advantage estimation λ        0.95       0.95         0.95                            gae lambda
   Optimizer maximum             10         10           10                              optimizer max epochs
   epochs
   RNN cell type used in         GRU        GRU          GRU                             cell type
   Policy
   Value function                                              Linear feature baseline   baseline
Policy entropy coefficient 5 × 10−6 5 × −6 5 × 10−6 policy ent coeff
       10
   Minimum policy standard       0.5        0.5          0.5                             min std
   deviation
   Maximum policy standard       0.5        0.5          0.5                             max std
   deviation
                                            Table 10: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with RL2










                                            31

   D.9 PEARL

   Description                 ML1   ML10        ML45    argument name
   Meta-/Multi-Task Hyperparameters
   Meta-batch size             16           10   45      meta batch size
   Tasks sampled per epoch     15           10   45      num tasks sample
   Number of independent             5                   num evals
   evaluations
   Steps sampled per           450   1,650       1,650   num steps per eval
   evaluation
   General Hyperparameters
   Batch size                  500   1,000       1,000   batch size
   Path length per roll-out                500           max path length
   Reward scale                           10,000         reward scale
   Discount factor                         0.99          discount
   Algorithm-Specific
   Hyperparameters
   Policy hidden sizes               (300, 300, 300)     net size
   Activation function of                  ReLU          hidden nonlinearity
   hidden layers
   Policy learning rate                  3 × 10−4        policy lr
   Q-function learning rate              3 × 10−4        qf lr
   Value function learning               3 × 10−4        vf lr
   rate
   Context learning rate                 3 × 10−4        context lr
   Latent dimension                         7            latent dimension
   Policy mean regularization            1 × 10−3        policy mean reg coeff
   coefficient
   Policy standard deviation             1 × 10−3        policy std reg coeff
   regularization coefficient
   Soft target interpolation             5 × 10−3        soft target tau
   parameter
   KL λ                                    0.01          KL lambda
   Use information                         True          use information bottleneck
   bottleneck
   Use next observation in         False                 use next observation in context
   context
   Gradient steps per epoch    1            60   14      num steps per epoch
Steps sampled in the initial 1,000 5,000 22,500 num initial steps
epoch
   Prior steps sampled per                 2500          num steps prior
   epoch
   Posterior steps sampled                 2500          num steps posterior
   per epoch
   Extra posterior steps                   2500          num extra steps posterior
   sampled per epoch
   Embedding batch size                    250           embedding batch size
   Embedding minibatch size                250           embedding mini batch size
       Table 11: Hyperparameters used for Garage experiments with PEARL








                                     32

    E    Reward Functions and Single-Task Results
    E.1      Reward Functions
    The variables that will be discussed are the following:
     O ∈ R3 : object position
     h ∈ R3 : hand/gripper position
     t ∈ R3 : target/goal position
    hl ∈ R3 : position of the left hand/gripper pad
    hr ∈ R3 : position of the right hand/gripper pad
    Oi ∈ R3 : initial position of the object
    hi ∈ R3 : initial position of the hand/gripper
      g ∈ R : gripper closed/open amount
    The following tolerance function is used frequently:
                             
    L(x, bmin, bmax, m) =        1S (( bmin−x , 0.1))   bmin ≤ x ≤ bmax
                              S    x−mb    , 0.1        x < bmin
                                     mmax                x ≥ bmax
    Where S is defined to be a long-tail sigmoid:

    S(a1, a2) = (( a2 1− 1 − 1) a21 + 1)−1

    With these basics in place, we define a caging tensor that describes behaviour in an axis which
    intersects the gripper’s actuated fingers (in code, the Y axis):
                    (∣[∣   h      ]      ∣∣      ∣∣[               ]      ∣    ∣)
    CLR (c1, c2) = L  ∣∣   hL,(y)   − o(y)∣∣ , c1, c2, ∣∣∣∣ hL,(y         ∣∣   ∣∣
                           R,(y)                         ∣∣  hR,(y))  − oi,(y)∣ − c2∣
    A similar caging value describes behaviour in the other two axes (in code, X and Z axes):

    CP (c3) = L (‖o(xz) − h(xz)‖, 0, c3, ‖oi,(xz) − hi,(xz)‖ − c3)

    These get lumped together as follows (TH₀ is the Hamacher product):

    C(c1, c2, c3) = TH₀ (TH₀ (CLR,(0), CLR,(1)), CP (c       3 ))
    The caging reward has two modes: medium density and high density. The arguments c1, c2, c3 are
    passed to C

    Rcage,dense(c1, c2, c3) = {     0.5(C + TH (C, g))         C > 0.97
                                    0.5C     0                 otherwise
Rcage(c1, c2, c3, c4) = { 0.5(L(‖o − h‖, 0, c4, ‖o − hi‖) + TH (C, g)) C > 0.97
                              0.5L(‖o − h‖, 0, c4, ‖o − hi‖)              0        otherwise

    In each set of expressions given below, the arguments passed to Rcage or Rcage,dense correspond to
    [c1, c2, c3...]. The caging reward also considers [h, hi, o, oi] as described on the previous page, but
    these arguments are omitted for brevity.
    If computation involves a parameter A, understand that A is non-zero if f the Sawyer successfully
    grasps the object. As such, A serves as a post-grasp guidance term.
    Common patterns include A +TH (Rcage, L(t−o, ...)), TH (1−g, L(o−h, ...)), and L(t−o, ...)+
                                     0       for simple tasks consist ⁰   of summed tolerances, while more
    L(o − h, ...). As a general rule, rewards
    difficult tasks add complexity in the form of Hamacher Products. The Hamacher Products combine
    tolerances, grip effort, and/or Rcage to produce a smooth, dense reward.

                                                             33

E.1.1 Basketball


A = I‖o−h‖<0.035 & g>0 & o(z)−oi(z)>0.01 · (1 + L(‖〈1, 1, 2〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.08, ‖〈1, 1, 2〉 · (t − oi)‖))

R =  A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.025, 0.06, 0.005),                               ‖〈1, 1, 2〉 · (t − o)‖ ≥ 0.08
 10        L(‖〈1, 1, 2〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.08, ‖〈1, 1, 2〉 · (t − oi)‖))        otherwise

E.1.2   Button Press Top Down
R = { 5TH (1 − g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖o − hi‖))                                                    ‖o − h‖ > 0.03
        5T     0
        H0 (1 − g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖o − hi‖)) + 5L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.005, |t(z) − oi,(z)|))   otherwise

E.1.3   Button Press Top Down Wall
R = { 5TH⁰ (1 − g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖o − hi‖))                                                   ‖o − h‖ > 0.03
        5TH₀ (1 − g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖o − hi‖)) + 5L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.005, |t(z) − oi,(z)|)) otherwise

E.1.4   Button Press
R = { 2TH⁰ (g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖o − hi‖))                                                     ‖o − h‖ > 0.05
        2TH₀ (g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖o − hi‖)) + 8L(|t(y) − o(y)|, 0, 0.005, |t(y) − oi,(y)|))   otherwise

E.1.5   Button Press Wall
R = { 2TH⁰ (1 − g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖o − hi‖))                   ‖o − h‖ > 0.07
        4 + 2g + 4(L(|t(y) − o(y)|, 0, 0.005, |t(y) − oi,(y)|)2))   otherwise

E.1.6   Coffee Button
R = { 2TH⁰ (g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖o − hi‖))                                                     ‖o − h‖ > 0.05
        2TH₀ (g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖o − hi‖)) + 8L(|t(y) − o(y)|, 0, 0.005, |t(y) − oi,(y)|))   otherwise

E.1.7   Coffee Pull
A = I‖o−h‖<0.04 & g>0 · (1 + 5L(‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))

R =  A + TH⁰ (Rcage(0.02, 0.05, 0.05, 0.04),                                 ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖ ≥ 0.05
          10    L(‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))   otherwise

E.1.8   Coffee Push
A = I‖o−h‖<0.04 & g>0 · (1 + 5L(‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))

R =  A + TH⁰ (Rcage(0.02, 0.05, 0.05, 0.04),                                 ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖ ≥ 0.05
          10    L(‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))   otherwise

E.1.9   Door Close
R = { 6L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)) + 3L(‖t − h‖, 0, 0.012, 0.1 + ‖hi − o‖)     ‖t − o‖ ≥ 0.05
           10                                                                     otherwise

E.1.10  Door Lock
R = 2TH (g, L(‖〈1, 4, 2〉 · (o − h)‖, 0, 0.01, ‖〈1,4, 2〉 ·
        0        (o − hi)‖)) + 8L(|t(z) − oi,(z)|, 0, 0.005, 0.1)

            34

    E.1.11   Door Unlock
        2L(‖〈1, 4, 2〉 · (o − h + 〈0, 0.055, 0.07〉)‖,
    R =       0,
              0.02,
             ‖〈1, 4, 2〉 · (oi − hi + 〈0, 0.055, 0.07〉)‖)) + 8L(|t(x) − oi,(x)|, 0, 0.005, 0.1)

    E.1.12   Door Open
    alt = I‖h(xy)−o(xy)‖>0.12 · (0.4 + 0.04 log (‖h(xy) − o(xy)‖−0.12))
             { T        (L(‖h − o − 〈0.05, 0.03 −0.01〉‖,   0                                          )
    ready =           H0        ,                       , 0.06, 0.5), L(alt − h(z), 0, 0.01, alt ),     h   < alt
                      (‖h   o − 〈 .05, .03,  0.01 , 0, .06,       .5)
                 L        − 0     0     −    〉‖     0                                              2    (z)
                                                               0                                        otherwise

                                                    8    (   (θ)     3   0 0 5    π3   | (x)   (x)    08
    R = { 2TH (g, ready) + 8 (0.2Io          + . L o              + 2π , ,   .  , ))     t  − o  | > 0.
           10    0        (θ)<0.03                 0                                   otherwise

    E.1.13   Box Close
    alt = I‖h(xy)−o(xy)‖>0.02 · (0.4 + 0.04 log (‖h(xy) − o(xy)‖−0.02))

    ready = {    TH₀ (L(‖h − o‖, 0, 0.02, 0.5), L(alt − h(z), 0, 0.01, alt ), )       h
                      (‖ − o‖ 0, 0 02, 0 5)
                 L    h     ,     . .                                        2        (z) < alt
                                                                                      otherwise

R = { 2TH⁰ ( g+12 , ready) + 8 (0.2Io(z)>0.04 + 0.8L(〈1, 1, 3〉‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, 0.25)) |t − o| ≥ 0.08
           10                                                                                      otherwise

E.1.14 Drawer Open
R = 5 (L (‖t − o‖, 0, 0.02, 0.2) + L (‖(o − h) · 〈3,3,1〉‖, 0, 0.01, ‖(oi − hi) · 〈3, 3, 1〉‖))

    E.1.15   Drawer Close
    R = { TH⁰ (L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖ − 0.05), TH⁰ (g, L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.005, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.005)))           ‖t − o‖ > 0.065
           10                                                                                                    otherwise

    E.1.16   Faucet Close
    R = { 4L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.01, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.01) + 6L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.07, ‖t − oi‖ − 0.07)              ‖t − o‖ > 0.07
           10                                                                                         otherwise

    E.1.17   Faucet Open
        
    R =  (4L(‖o − h + 〈−.04, 0, .03〉‖, 0, 0.01, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.01)                ‖t − o + 〈−.04, 0, .03〉‖ > 0.07
         10+ 6L(‖t − o + 〈−.04, 0, .03〉‖, 0, 0.07, ‖t − oi‖ − 0.07))             otherwise

    E.1.18   Hand Insert
    A = I‖o−h‖<0.02 & g>0 · (1 + 7L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))

    R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.05, 0.005), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))           ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
           10                                                                                otherwise

    E.1.19   Pick Place
    A = I‖o−h‖<0.02 & g>0 & o(z)>0.01 · (1 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))

    R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.05, 0.005), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))           ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
           10                                                                                otherwise

                                                    35

E.1.20  Pick Out Of Hole
A funnel-shaped surface guides the gripper as it seeks to grab and lift the object; this prevents the
gripper from running into the side of the hole in the table. The height (or ”altitude”) of this surface
is given by alt since the variables h and z are already used.
alt = I‖h(xy)−oi,(xy)‖>0.03 · (0.15 + 0.015 log (‖h(xy) − oi,(xy)‖−0.03))

A =I‖o(−h‖<0.04 & (
            g<0.33 & o(z)−oi,(z)>0.02        ))
•       1 + 5TH₀    L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.02, ‖t − oi‖),
            max(Ih(z)>alt, L(alt − h(z), 0, 0.01, 0.02))

R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.05, 0.005), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                       otherwise

E.1.21  Plate Slide Back Side
A = I‖o−h‖<0.07 & h(z)≤0.03

R = { A · (2 + 7L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)) + (1 − A) · 1.5L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.05)    ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                             otherwise

E.1.22  Plate Slide Back
A = I‖o−h‖<0.07 & h(z)≤0.03

R = { A · (2 + 7L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)) + (1 − A) · 1.5L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.05)    ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                             otherwise

E.1.23  Plate Slide Side
A = I‖o−h‖<0.07 & h(z)≤0.03

R = { A · (2 + 7L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)) + (1 − A) · 1.5L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.05)    ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                             otherwise

E.1.24  Plate Slide
R = { 8TH⁰ (L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖), L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖oi − hi‖))   ‖t − o‖ ≥ 0.05
        10                                                                   otherwise

E.1.25  Handle Press Side
R = { 10TH⁰ (L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|), L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.02, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.02))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                        otherwise

E.1.26  Handle Press
R = { 10TH⁰ (L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|), L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.02, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.02))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                        otherwise

E.1.27  Handle Pull
A = I‖o−h‖<0.035 & g>0 & o(z)−oi,(z)>0.01 · (1 + 5L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|))

R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.022, 0.05, 0.01), L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                   otherwise

E.1.28  Handle Pull Side
A = I‖o−h‖<0.035 & g>0 & o(z)−oi,(z)>0.01 · (1 + 5L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|))

R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.032, 0.06, 0.01), L(|t(z) − o(z)|, 0, 0.05, |t(z) − oi,(z)|))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                                   otherwise

            36

E.1.29  Reach
R = 10L(‖t − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − hi‖)

E.1.30  Reach Wall
R = 10L(‖t − h‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − hi‖)

E.1.31  Push
A = I‖o−h‖<0.02 & g>0

R = { (A + 1) · Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.05, 0.005) + A · (1 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
    10                                                                              otherwise

E.1.32  Sweep Into Goal
Note: This technically uses a Rcage,dense function with slightly different margin parameters than the
one described above (they are constant rather than dynamic), but the behaviour is mostly the same.

R =  (2Rcage,dense(0.02, 0.05, 0.01)                                           ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
 + 2TH₀ (Rcage,dense(0.02, 0.05, 0.01), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)))
        10                                                                      otherwise

E.1.33  Sweep
Note: This technically uses a Rcage,dense function with slightly different margin parameters than the
one described above (they are constant rather than dynamic), but the behaviour is mostly the same.

R =  (2Rcage,dense(0.02, 0.05, 0.01)                                           ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
 + 2TH₀ (Rcage,dense(0.02, 0.05, 0.01), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖)))
        10                                                                      otherwise

E.1.34  Push Back
Note: This technically uses a Rcage,dense function with slightly different margin parameters than the
one described above (they are constant rather than dynamic), but the behaviour is mostly the same.

A = I‖o−h‖<0.01 & 0<g<0.55 & ‖t−oi‖−‖t−o‖>0.01 · (1 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))

R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.01, 0.05, 0.01), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))   ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
        10                                                                     otherwise

E.1.35  Window Open
R = 10TH₀ (L(|t(x) − o(x)|, 0, 0.05, |t(x) − oi,(x)|), L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.02, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.02))

E.1.36  Window Close
R = 10TH₀ (L(|t(x) − o(x)|, 0, 0.05, |t(x) − oi,(x)|), L(‖o − h‖, 0, 0.02, ‖oi − hi‖ − 0.02))

E.1.37  Dial Turn
R = 10TH₀ (L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖ − 0.05),
          TH₀ (g,
            L(‖o − h + 〈0.05, 0.02, 0.09〉‖,
              0,
              0.005,
              ‖oi − hi + 〈0.05, 0.02, 0.09〉‖ −  0.005)))

                  37

    E.1.38  Bin Picking
    Two funnel-shaped surfaces guide the gripper as it seeks to carry the object between the two bins;
    this prevents the gripper from running into the side of the bins. The height (or ”altitude”) of this
    surface is given by alt since the variables h and z are already used.

    alt = min(I‖h(xy)−oi,(xy)‖>0.03 (· (0.2 + 0.02 log( (‖h(xy) − oi,(xy)‖−0.03)) ,
         I‖h(xy)−t(xy)‖>0.03 · 0.2 + 0.02 log        ‖h(xy) − t(xy)‖−0.03)))
    A = I‖o−h‖<0.04 & g<0.43 & o(z)−oi,(z)>0.02 · (1 + 5TH₀ (L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖),       ))
                                                               max(Ih(z)>alt, L(alt − h(z), 0, 0.01, 0.05))

    R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.05, 0.01), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))    ‖t − o‖ > 0.05
         10                                                                          otherwise

    E.1.39  Assembly
    In addition to the components described below, the assembly reward is weighted by how level the
    object is (tilted object quaternions are penalized).

    alt = I‖t(xy)−o(xy)‖>0.02 · (0.4 + 0.04 log (‖t(xy) − o(xy)‖−0.02))

    A = 0.1Io(z)>0.02or‖t(xy)−o(xy)‖<0.02 + 0.9L(〈1,    1, 3〉〈t
                                                           (x) − o(x), t(y) − o(y), alt − o(z)〉, 0, 0.02, 0.4)

    R = { 2Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.02, 0.01) + 8A   |t(x) − o(x)| > 0.02
         10                                      otherwise

    E.1.40  Disassemble
    In addition to the components described below, the disassemble reward is weighted by how level the
    object is (tilted object quaternions are penalized).

    R = { 2Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.02, 0.01) + 6 (0.1Io(z)>0.02 + 0.9L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.02, 0.2))   o(z) > t(z)
         10                                                                                   otherwise

    E.1.41   Hammer
    In addition to the components described below, the hammer reward is weighted by how level the
    object is (tilted object quaternions are penalized).

    R = { 2Rcage,dense(0.015, 0.02, 0.01) + 6 (0.1Io(z)>0.02 + 0.9L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.02, 0.2))   |o(y) − oi,(y)| > 0.09
         10                                                                                   otherwise

    E.1.42  Lever Pull

R = 10TH₀ (L (‖t − o‖, 0, 0.04, ‖t − oi‖) ,
        L (〈4, 1, 4〉 · (h − o + 〈0, 0.055, 0.07〉),0,0.02, 〈4, 1, 4〉 · (hi − oi + 〈0, 0.055, 0.07〉)))

    E.1.43   Stick Push
    Note: a is the second object in the environment, which in this case is a thermos.
     
     
      2 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.12, ‖t − o ‖ −
             i                                    0.12)   ‖h − o‖ < 0.02, g > 0, o  o                   − ‖  0 12
    R =    + 3L(‖t − a‖, 0, 0.12, ‖t − ai‖ − 0.12)            (z) −                 i,(z)    > 0.01, ‖t  a   > .
      10                                                  ‖h − o‖ < 0.02, g > 0, o(z) − oi,(z) > 0.01, ‖t − a‖ ≤ 0.12
      Rcage,dense(0.04, 0.05, 0.01)                       otherwise

                                                      38

E.1.44 Stick Pull
Note: a is the second object in the environment, which in this case is a thermos. in is a condition
involving lots of vector offsets from the object observations. It indicates whether the stick is inserted
into the thermos’ handle or not. The variable stick in place, and stick grabbed have also been
defined so that the reward function fits on one page.
stick in place = L(‖(o − a) · 〈1, 1, 2〉‖, 0, 0.12, ‖(oi − ai) · 〈1, 1, 2〉‖)
stick grabbed = ‖h − o‖ < 0.02, g > 0, o(z) − oi,(z) > 0.01

     
     
      1 + 6 · stick in place                                       stick grabbed, ¬in, ‖t − a‖ > 0.12
     
    R =  6 + stick in place + 2L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.12, ‖t − oi‖)       stick grabbed, in, ‖t − a‖ > 0.12
      + L(‖t − a‖, 0, 0.12, ‖t − ai‖)
     
     
      10                                                           stick grabbed, in, ‖t − a‖ ≤ 0.12
            TH₀ (Rcage,dense(0.014, 0.05, 0.01), stick in place)    otherwise
    E.1.45   Shelf Place
    In addition to the components described below, the shelf-place reward includes negative components
    that help avoid collision with the shelf.
    A = I‖o−h‖<0.025 & g>0 & o(z)>0.01 · (1 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))

    R = { A + TH⁰ (Rcage(0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.01), L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))   ‖t − o‖ ≥ 0.05
         10                                                                        otherwise

E.1.46 Peg Insert
In addition to the components described below, the peg-insert reward includes negative components
that help avoid collision with the hole/box into which the peg gets inserted.
A = I‖o−h‖<0.08 & g>0 & o(z)>0.01 · (1 + 5L(‖〈2,2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))
     
    R =  A + TH⁰ (Rcage(0.0075, 0.01, 0.03, 0.005),                          ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖ ≥ 0.07
      10        L(‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − o)‖, 0, 0.05, ‖〈2, 2, 1〉 · (t − oi)‖))   otherwise

    E.1.47   Peg Unplug
    A = I‖o−h‖<0.035 & g>0.5 & o(x)−oi,(x)>0.015 · (1 + 5L(‖t − o‖, 0, 0.05, ‖t − oi‖))

    R = { A + 2Rcage(0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.005)        ‖t − o‖ ≥ 0.07
            10                                        otherwise

    E.1.48   Soccer
    In addition to the components described below, the soccer reward function includes parameters to
    fine-tune movements near the goal line.
     
    R =  3Rcage(0.013, 0.023, 0.05, 0.005)                          ‖〈3, 1, 1〉(t − o)‖ ≥ 0.07
             + 6.5L(‖〈3, 1, 1〉(t − o)‖, 0, 0.07, ‖〈3, 1, 1〉(t
      10                                                 − oi)‖)    otherwise
    E.1.49   Pick Place Wall
    The pick-place-wall reward is essentially two pick-place rewards stacked on top of one another. The
    first pick-place reward incentivizes movement to a neutral midpoint above the wall (to avoid running
    into it). The second pick-place reward incentivizes movement to the target position. The math is
    such that there is no discontinuity between the two reward components.
    E.1.50   Push Wall
    The push-wall reward is the same as the pick-place-wall reward, but without incentives to pick up
    the object. Additionally, the midpoint is configured to be next to the wall (so that policies push the
    object around the wall) rather than above the wall.

                                                      39

Task                      Success Metric
faucet-open                I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
sweep                      I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
pick-out-of-hole           I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
faucet-close               I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
push                       I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
stick-push         I‖o−t‖₂<0.12 and Igrasped(o)
coffee-button              I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
handle-pull-side           I‖o−t‖₂<0.08
basketball                 I‖o−t‖₂<0.08
stick-pull         I‖o−t‖₂<0.12 and Igrasped(o)
sweep-into                 I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
disassemble           Ioz −oz initial > 0.15
assembly           I‖o−t‖₂<0.02 and Igz −oz >0
shelf-place                I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
coffee-push                I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
handle-press-side          I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
hammer         Inail travels > 0.09 into wood block
plate-slide                I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
plate-slide-side           I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
button-press-wall          I‖o−t‖₂<0.03
handle-press               I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
handle-pull                I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
soccer                     I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
plate-slide-back-side      I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
plate-slide-back           I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
drawer-close              I‖o−t‖₂<0.055
reach                      I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
button-press-topdown-wall  I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
reach-wall                 I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
peg-insert-side            I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
push-wall                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
pick-place-wall            I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
button-press               I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
button-press-topdown       I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
pick-place                 I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
push-back                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
coffee-pull                I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
peg-unplug-side            I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
dial-turn                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.07
lever-pull             Irad(o)−rad(t)<π/24
window-close               I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
window-open                I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
door-open                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.08
door-close                 I‖o−t‖₂<0.08
drawer-open                I‖o−t‖₂<0.03
hand-insert                I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
box-close                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.08
door-lock                  I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
door-unlock                I‖o−t‖₂<0.02
bin-picking                I‖o−t‖₂<0.05
Table 12: A list of success metrics used for each of the Meta-World tasks. All units are in meters.




40

