Operational Design Domain (ODD)
Standardisation activities:
BSI PAS 1883 and ISO 34503



    Dr Siddartha Khastgir CEng MIMechE
    Head of Verification & Validation, Intelligent Vehicles
    WMG, University of Warwick, UK
    UK Expert – ISO TC204/WG14, ISO TC22/SC33/WG9


    ASAM OpenODD Ideation workshop
    23 April 2020

Agenda

  Introduction
  Ongoing standardisation projects
  Conclusions

   Operational Design Domain (ODD)



“Operating conditions under which a given driving automation system or
feature thereof is specifically designed to function, including, but not limited
to, environmental, geographical, and time-of-day restrictions, and/or the
requisite presence or absence of certain traffic or roadway characteristics.”
        - SAE J3016 (2018)

Evaluation continuum

  We needed to create new facilities and capability, desirable to industry
  This was through our proposed continuum of approaches: simulation,
   simulated environment and real-world trials/testing and deployment

  Public Environments Controlled Environments Modelling and Simulation

        i
MIDLANDS Saw
FUTURE 2 : |
MOBILITY | wp —

Why is ODD important?

 Number of miles driven?


11 Billion miles₁
To demonstrate with 95% confidence that AVs are
20% better than human drivers










1 N. Kalra and S. M. Paddock, “Driving to safety: How many miles of driving would it take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability?,” Transp. Res. Part A
Policy Pract., vol. 94, no. December, pp. 182–193, 20163

Why is ODD important?

  Number of miles driven?
  Types of scenarios experienced?

         wh
       we      on                a
   in    oi        :             |


i    ~~  =

Why is ODD important?

  Number of miles driven?
  Types of scenarios experienced?
  Types of scenarios as a function of ODD

Introduction        50     |     Gl.
  Crowded landscape              NS
  Niche areas
Major committees:        @] ASAM
  BSI (UK): PAS 1883 (1880-83)    4
  ISO: TC 204 WG14, TC22 SC33
   (WG9/WG16)
  ASAM: OPENLabel, OPENOntology,
  OPENODD?        INTERNATIONAL.
   SAE: ORAD
  UL: 4600        \
  UNECE        y UNECE

BSI PAS 1883: ODD Taxonomy bsi
        Gl.

“This PAS provides requirements for the minimum hierarchical taxonomy for specifying an Operational Design
Domain (ODD) to enable the safe deployment of an automated driving system (ADS). The ODD comprises the
static and dynamic attributes within which an ADS is designed to function safely.

This PAS is applicable to Level 3 and level 4 ADS.

NOTE For more information on Level 3/4 ADS see SAE J3016.

This PAS is for use by trialling organizations developing safety cases for automated vehicle trials and testing.
This PAS is also for use by manufacturers of Level 3/4 ADS to define the operating capability. It is also of interest
to insurers, regulators, service providers, national, local and regional government to enable them to understand
possible ADS deployments and capabilities.

This PAS does not cover the basic test procedures for attributes of the ODD. It does not cover the monitoring
requirements of the ODD attributes.”



    Siddartha Khastgir (UK) – Lead author
        SWMG

BSI PAS 1883: ODD Taxonomy





 s cenery                 Environmental      Dynamic
                          conditions     4   elements

 Zones                    Weather           Traffic
 Drivable area            Particulates      Subject vehicle
 Junctions                Illumination
 Special structures       Connectivity

 Fixed road structures

 Temporary road structures


 Siddartha Khastgir (UK) – Lead author
                                             THE  OF
                                             UNIVERSITY
                                                WARWICK

BSI PAS 1883: ODD Taxonomy

 Project started: October 2019
 Around 20 member PAS steering committee: OEMs, tier-1, simulation
  suppliers, Research organisation, local authorities etc.
 Public consultation: 17 March – 14 April 2020
 Target publication: June/July 2020 (freely available)

ISO 34503: ODD Taxonomy    ISO
                           LOY

  Building on PAS 1883
  Under the aegis of ISO TC22 SC33 WG9
     Convenorship: CATARC, China
  Ensure attributes have international relevance

  Main additions:
      Measurability of environmental elements
      Format for ODD definition (across the evaluation continuum)
         Restrictive format
         Extensible



        Siddartha Khastgir (UK) & Kunimichi Hatano (JP) – Lead authors OWMG

ISO 34503: ODD Taxonomy                                                                                                   ISO
                                                                                                                           NS

 Main additions:
    Measurability of environmental elements
    Format for ODD definition (across the evaluation continuum)
                                                                                    we     allow [motorways, radial roads, distributor roads].
       Restrictive format                                                      For road type,
       Extensible                                                              We do not allow [minor roads).
                                                                                    at least                             lanes with at
                              bute                 (M)        TTT               For lane specification               allow
                                                  Motorways
                                                                          Yes   We do not allow [bus lane, cycle lane,   tram lane, emergency lane].
                              Road type “| Radial roads (A)   A          Tves   For lane type we allowwe[traffic lane].  2      least [3.7m] width.  |
                                                                          Yes
                                        [Minor roads     |                 No  [For direction of travel, we allow        drive]      |
                                        Number of lanes.          os,
                                        [Cane  dimensions         Minin 37m
                              Lane      Lan
                                               pm            | Cycle lane  No
                                                                            -
                                                                         | No
                                                             Emergencylane


                                                              ves


      Siddartha Khastgir (UK) & Kunimichi Hatano (JP) – Lead authors                                                     OWMG

   Summary

        Connected and Autonomous Vehicles standardisation is gaining
        traction internationally (both countries and organisations).

Safety is paramount for all countries

Operational Design Domain definition is fundamental for ensuring
safety
Existing BSI and ISO committees are working on standardisation of > usd i if " [xi
ODD taxonomy and ODD definition format. We need to ensure we pus
align and complement various standardisation initiatives. ad

Success will be dependent upon suitable collaboration and data ie
sharing, nationally and internationally.

  Thank you…
  Discussion… —  ®@):


   SR,


         2        NL
=                                TY  Add
     3   fr                       3  ne : 3  8  ==   \
                                                     a
             Clg                                      @siddkhastgir
     Siddartha Khastgir CEng MIMechE
     S.Khastgir.1@warwick.ac.uk                       wMaG

