Learning Autonomous Driving Tasks via Human Feedbacks with Large
    Language Models

      Yunsheng Ma¹, Xu Cao², Wenqian Ye3, Can Cui¹, Kai Mei⁴, Ziran Wang¹,
        1Purdue University, 2UIUC, 3University of Virginia, 4Rutgers University
        Correspondence: ziran@purdue.edu




                             Abstract
           Traditional autonomous driving systems have        Human Instruction: I saw the news that there is
                                                              congestion ahead. Let’s take a left at the next light
            mainly focused on making driving decisions        and re-navigate to my destination.
          without human interaction, overlooking human-
          like decision-making and human preference re-
          quired in complex traffic scenarios. To bridge
             this gap, we introduce a novel framework                                               Not Satisfied
             leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs)                                                Satisfied
          for learning human-centered driving decisions
          from diverse simulation scenarios and environ-
            ments that incorporate human feedback. Our                                          Simulator
           contributions include a GPT-4-based program-                                         results
           ming planner that integrates seamlessly with                                             Human Feedback
            the existing CARLA simulator to understand
         traffic scenes and react to human instructions.
           Specifically, we build a human-guided learn-      Figure 1: Schematic view of human feedback learning
           ing pipeline that incorporates human driver       in the CARLA autonomous driving simulation.
         feedback directly into the learning process and
          stores optimal driving programming policy us-
            ing Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG).        There will be instances where autonomous vehicles
           Impressively, our programming planner, with       must make a choice between undesirable outcomes,
            only 50 saved code snippets, can match the       like deciding between harming pedestrians or en-
         performance of baseline extensively trained re-     dangering the vehicle and its occupants to protect
           inforcement learning (RL) models. Our paper
            highlights the potential of an LLM-powered       the pedestrians (Bonnefon et al., 2016). Creating
           shared-autonomy system, pushing the frontier      the human-centered decision-making algorithms
           of autonomous driving system development to       that enable these vehicles to navigate such ethical
       be more interactive and intuitive.                    dilemmas presents a significant challenge.
    1  Introduction                                                In recent months, the advancements in large lan-
                                                             guage models (LLMs) have shown emerging ca-
         Autonomous driving has the potential to revolu-     pabilities in many aspects. One study (Wei et al.,
        tionize transportation and urban mobility and has    2022a) introduced this concept and defined emer-
         been a primary focus of research and development    gence as abilities that are "not present in smaller
        for the past two decades (Cui et al., 2024b). Tra-   models but are present in larger models”. Experi-
          ditional development of autonomous driving has     ments show that LLMs can tackle complicated lan-
         primarily focused on achieving perfect black box    guage tasks on challenges benchmarks including
       safe navigation, and the role of humans in the sys-        TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022), Massive Multi-task
       tem is often minimized, due to the doubts about the   Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks
        feasibility and benefits of integrating human and    et al., 2021), and Word in Context (WiC) (Pilehvar
        autonomous driving systems collaboratively (Para-    and Camacho-Collados, 2019).
           suraman and Riley, 1997; Andrew, 2003). How-              This advancement also offers new possibilities
       ever, the human-like decision is still an important   for redefining human-vehicle interaction and has
         factor in designing autonomous driving systems.     inspired researchers to reconsider the human roles
                                                4985
       Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 4985–4995
                November 12-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics

within the autonomous driving ecosystem. For ex- 2 Related Work
ample, the "Drive as you speak" concept (Cui et al.,
2024a) proposes a more intuitive, human-like in- 2.1 Human-Centered Autonomous Driving
teraction inside autonomous vehicles, enabling the Human-centered autonomous driving prioritizes
vehicles to understand and respond to natural lan- the demand for the safety and comfort of street
guage commands. Moreover, the incorporation stakeholders in the system design (Xing et al.,
of reasoning and reflective modules in the DiLu 2021). Unlike traditional autonomous driving tech-
framework (Wen et al., 2024) endows autonomous nologies, which primarily focus on the efficiency
vehicles with decision-making processes that mir- and performance of the vehicle itself, human-
ror human common-sense reasoning. These efforts centered autonomous driving emphasizes integrat-
show the potential of autonomous vehicle systems ing user feedback into the driving planning and con-
not just as independent units, but as interactive plat- trol to create more intuitive, trustworthy, and user-
    forms that engage with users.                       friendly autonomous driving experiences (Fridman,
  Essentially, an autonomous driving system is 2018). Previous research has demonstrated that lan-
an AI-infused system (Amershi et al., 2019) that guage models can facilitate smoother interactions
interfaces with users. Therefore, it is crucial to by answering questions between humans and vehi-
incorporate a human-centric approach in its de- cles (Deruyttere et al., 2019). Nonetheless, these
sign and operation. The Human-Computer Inter- advancements are often constrained by the mod-
actions (HCI) community has proposed principles, els’ scale and performance, grappling with safety
guidelines, and strategies for AI system interac- and efficiency challenges that are important for
tions. These are becoming increasingly relevant in real-world application. Moreover, human-centered
    autonomous vehicle development.                     autonomous driving recognizes the critical role of
  Drawing from the design patterns suggested in interactions with other street stakeholders, not only
the People + AI Guidebook (Google PAIR, 2019), language-based communication with drivers. To
such as "let users supervise automation" and "let address these complexities, recent studies suggest
users give feedback," as well as the "shared auton- leveraging large language models such as GPT-4
omy" concept, which views rich, effective commu- to understand and integrate key street stakeholders’
nication as the most essential design element (Frid- information and user’s verbal feedback (Fu et al.,
man, 2018), this paper focuses on two essential 2024b; Yang et al., 2024b; Cui et al., 2024b).
features as shown in Fig. 2: (1) to interact with 2.2 Reasoning with Large Language Models
users based on spontaneous user instructions, and
(2) to adapt and learn from user feedback in nat- Reasoning is a fundamental aspect of human in-
ural language. Specifically, our contributions are telligence. It is defined as a cognitive concept in-
    summarized as follows:                              volving the use of evidence, arguments, and logic,
                                                        playing a central role in intellectual activities such
     • An LLM-based programming planner is devel-       as problem solving, decision making, and critical
      oped to serve as a plug-in module for classical   thinking. Recently, LLMs have shown some emer-
          autonomous driving pipelines to enable them   gent behaviors, including the ability to "reason".
        to understand traffic scenes and follow human   One approach to encourage LLMs to reason is us-
      instructions.                                     ing chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al.,
                                                        2022b). CoT decomposes a complicated reasoning
       • A human-guided learning pipeline is proposed   task, such as a multi-step math word problem into
           for the programming planner to allow it to   intermediate steps, and solves each before giving
      continuously learn from human feedback.           the final answer. Additionally, LLMs have demon-
                                                        strated zero-shot reasoning abilities by introducing
     • The experiment results from the CARLA au-        phrases like "Let’s think step by step" before each
            tonomous driving simulation show that the   answer (Kojima et al., 2022). Tree-of-Thoughts
          proposed programming planner, using only 50   (Yao et al., 2023) further generalizes CoT by ex-
         saved code snippets, matches the performance   ploring multiple reasoning paths. A closely related
      of reinforcement learning (RL) methods.           previous study is Auto-CoT (Zhang et al., 2023),
                                                        which leverages zero-shot CoT to generate diverse
                                                        reasoning chains as demonstrations and samples
          4986

                           Execuation        Language Model Program

                           Let’s take a right at the
                           next light and re-navigate
                           to my destination.
               Structured  Instruction        Code Generation
               Language                                          Retrival
               Generator   There is a trafic light and it is     Augmented
                           Red. It is 5.52 m ahead. My           Generation
                           current speed is 7.0 m/s. There
                           are no obstacles in the vicinity.     (RAG)
                           Driving Context

                           writes Python code to complete
    Simulator   System     You are a helpful assistant who           Knowledge
               Message     any autonomous driving task               Database
                           speciied by me.



Figure 2: An overview of the proposed programming planner. Initially, the Large Language Model (LLM) is given a
prompt composed of human instruction, driving context, and system message. It then conducts chain-of-thought
reasoning to generate language model programs, which serve as driving policies. This policy code is executed in the
CARLA simulator to complete the driving task as specified in the instructions. Verified code is then added to the
knowledge database for future reference, utilizing Retrieval Augmented Generation.

them as examples for in-context learning. Concur- LLMs in the code understanding and generation
rently, there also exist some pioneer autonomous domain (Liu et al., 2023). Furthermore, this suc-
driving works (Sima et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2024) cess catalyzed the exploration of utilizing LLMs for
focusing on the reasoning in the driving context. robotics planning and control (Yang et al., 2024a),
        as evidenced by studies such as Voyager (Wang
2.3 Language-Guided Autonomous Driving et al., 2023a) and Code as Policies (Liang et al.,
LLMs have shown remarkable potential in com- 2023). Recent advancements have seen LLMs
plicated scenarios such as driving scene under- generate executable code that interfaces with driv-
standing and decision-making (Rufus et al., 2021; ing planning and control APIs, including LaMPi-
Marcu et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2023; Malla lot (Ma et al., 2024), LangProp (Ishida et al., 2024).
et al., 2023; Nanwani et al., 2023; Cao et al., Despite these advancements, there still needs im-
2024). Recent advancements focus on build- provement in current works to embed LLMs in
ing visual-language models to generate driving enhancing human-centered human-vehicle interac-
policy such as DriveMLM (Wang et al., 2023b) tions and teaming within driving models.
and DriveVLM (Tian et al., 2024). An equally 3
crucial area of research is the development of Methodology
language-guided closed-loop autonomous driving 3.1 Overview
systems. These systems leverage multimodal sen- This section elaborates on the framework of our
sor data from simulators, as demonstrated by Lim- proposed programming planner. It integrates the
Sim++ (Fu et al., 2024a) and LMDrive (Shao et al., world knowledge and reasoning capabilities of
2024). Additionally, RAG-Driver (Yuan et al., LLMs into the autonomous driving system that
2024) introduces a novel retrieval-augmented in- powers two essential shared autonomy features,
context learning approach, significantly enhancing namely following user instructions and integrat-
the zero-shot generalization capabilities of driving ing human feedback. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
LLMs. programming planner has the following key de-
  Building on LLMs’ success in NLP, there are signs: (1) Inspired by the ‘code as policies’ con-
also a great number of research works utilizing cept (Liang et al., 2023), we let LLMs generate
        4987

    System Message (X⁰sys)
    You are a helpful assistant that writes python code to complete any autonomous driving task specified by me.
    Here are the APIs you can use: {apis}
    Here are some useful programs written with the provided APIs: {programs}
    At each round of conversation, I will give you
    Code from last round: ... Command: ... Context: ... Feedback: ...
    You should then respond to me with
    Explain (if applicable): Are there any steps missing in your plan? Why is the code not satisfactory?
    Plan: How to complete the task step by step.
    Code: 1) Write a function taking NO argument. 2) Only use the APIs that I provided. 3) Anything defined outside a function will be ignored, define
    all your variables inside your functions. 4) Name your function in a meaningful way (considering both command and context). 5) You should only
    write one function, which will be called by me. Do not write multiple functions. 6) When calling ‘proceed()’ or ‘stop()’ function, you should always
    ‘yield’ the return value of the function. 7) You can reuse the above useful programs. 8) Do not write infinite loops. 9) Do not use any constant from
    the context, as it may dynamically change. Call the APIs to get the latest values. 10) Always provide feedback to the user using the ‘say’ function.
    You should only respond in the format as described below: {response_format}
    Instruction (X⁰q)
    Take a left at the next light.
    Driving Context (X⁰c)
    There is a traffic light and it is Red. It is 5.52 m ahead. My current speed is 7.0 m/s. There are no obstacles in the
    vicinity.
    Chain-of-Thought Reasoning (X⁰ᵣ )
    1) First, check the status of the traffic light. If it’s red, the vehicle should stop before the intersection. 2) Once the
    traffic light turns green, the vehicle should prepare to take a left turn at the intersection. 3) The vehicle will then turn
    left at the next intersection. 4) Throughout the process, provide feedback to the passenger about what actions the
    vehicle is planning to take.
    Code as Policies (X⁰ₚ)

    def  take_left_at_next_light () :
         if  check_red_light () :
             yield  stop ()
             say (" Stopping  for     the     red light .")
         say (" The light is  green     now .     Preparing to   take     a    left turn .")
         turn_left_at_next_intersection ()
         say (" Taking a left   turn     at     the  intersection .")
         yield proceed ( check_speed_limit () )


    Human Feedback (X¹f )
    You should have slowed down a little bit while making turns.
    Explanation (X¹ᵣ )
    Reducing the speed slightly below the speed limit during a turn can enhance safety, especially in autonomous driving
    scenarios where precise control is crucial for both passenger comfort and safety.
    Code as Policies (X¹ₚ)

# ... [ omitted ]
# Reduce speed by a small factor (e.g., 90 % of the speed limit ) to ensure a safer turn
safe_turn_speed = check_speed_limit () * 0.9
# ... [ omitted ]
yield proceed ( safe_turn_speed )


    Human Feedback (X²f )
    The turning speed was too fast.
    Explanation (X²ᵣ )
    It appears that the safe turning speed calculated as 90% of the speed limit was too fast for a safe left turn. To address
    this, we can further reduce the target speed for the turn to ensure safety.
    Code as Policies (X²ₚ)

    #  ... [ omitted ]
    #  Reduce the   speed to 70 % of the speed  limit for a     safer turn
    safe_turn_speed    = check_speed_limit ()  * 0.7
    #  ... [ omitted ]




Table 1: This example illustrates the reasoning and code generation process of the proposed programming planner.
The three blocks indicate that the generations occur in different iterations. Content with blue titles (chain-of-thought
reasoning, explanation, and code as policies) is generated by LLMs. Content with red titles (instruction and human
feedback) is provided by humans. The initial prompt includes three components: a system message (Xsys), human
instruction (Xq), and the current driving context (Xc). Subsequent prompts also include human feedback (Xf ) and
the policy code (Xp) from the last round. For brevity, the system message, human instruction, driving context, and
code from the last round are not included in subsequent prompts.

        4988

     Method                              Learning                Navigation DS (↑)      RC (↑)  IP (↑)
     Roach Expert (Zhang et al., 2021)   Reinforcement Learning   Waypoint        63.4  100.0    0.63
     TCP Expert (Wu et al., 2022)        Reinforcement Learning   Waypoint        68.1   95.8    0.71
     Programming Planner Expert (Ours)   0-Shot CoT          Human Instruction    0.00   48.7    0.00
     Programming Planner Expert (Ours)   3-Shot CoT          Human Instruction    17.3   65.3    0.31
     Programming Planner Expert (Ours)   Human-Feedback CoT  Human Instruction    65.4   95.1    0.68

    Table 2: Driving performance of expert drivers on CARLA leaderboard testing routes. The driving score (DS) is
    calculated by multiplying the route completion percentage (RC) by the infraction penalty (IP). The "Navigation"
    column specifies the format of the navigation information. Here, "Waypoint" refers to a predetermined sequence of
    GPS-style coordinates and enum route instructions, while "Human Instruction" refers to natural language navigation
    commands like "turn right at the next light", which is a more challenging setting. ↑: Higher values are better.

language model programs (LMPs). These LMPs perception modules or directly communicated by
serve as the action space, leveraging the inherent humans.
potential of programs to symbolize actions that are
both temporally extensive and hierarchically struc- 3.2 Programming Planner
tured. For instance, a complex maneuver like over- LLMs have shown remarkable abilities in compre-
taking can be programmatically split into a series hending complex contexts and creating high-level
of actions, including lane changes, acceleration, plans by leveraging their inherent common-sense
and possibly another lane change, composed with knowledge. However, despite their proficiency in
conditional logic. (2) We propose a human-guided high-level reasoning, LLMs face challenges when
learning pipeline to allow it to continuously learn it comes to generating precise low-level control
    from user’s feedback.                                   signals for autonomous vehicles. As highlighted
   As our experiments are based on the by Cui et al. in their survey (Cui et al., 2024b),
CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) (the most LLMs struggle with accurately interpreting spatial
widely used and realistic publicly available coordinates and creating detailed motion control
autonomous driving simulator), with Python as the commands. Moreover, the substantial size and au-
programming language for code generation, We’ll toregressive nature of these models often introduce
use specific terminologies related to this setup for significant latency in output generation, posing ma-
clarity, but it’s important to note that our approach jor obstacles for real-time objectives such as obsta-
    isn’t restricted to this setting.                       cle avoidance. This gap between high-level plan-
     The programming planner with the LLM back-             ning and low-level execution necessitates a novel
    bone ℓ takes inputs including system messages           approach to effectively harness the capabilities of
    (Xsys), human instructions (Xq), driving context        LLMs in autonomous driving systems.
    (Xc). It leverages CoT reasoning (Xr) (Wei et al.,       To address these limitations, we propose a plug-
    2022b) to write policy code (Xp), which can be          and-play programming planner that seamlessly in-
    formulated as:                                          tegrates with existing autonomous driving systems,
     [Xr, Xp] = ℓ([Xsys, Xq, Xc])                   (1)     rather than attempting to replace them entirely.
                                                            This design allows our approach to synergize the
           An example to show the generation process is     emerging capabilities of LLMs with the proven effi-
    provided in Table 1. The system message (Xsys) is       ciency of classical autonomous driving algorithms.
    a high-level instruction that guides the behavior of    Instead of directly generating real-time, low-level
    the model ℓ, which sets the overall objective for the   control signals like steering or throttle changes,
    generation. It also includes the API documentation      which LLMs are ill-suited for, our planner operates
    (detailed in Section 3.2) and retrieved programs        at a higher level of abstraction. It generates code
    (detailed in Section 3.3). The human instructions       snippets at lower frequencies, which serve as tem-
    (Xq) are spontaneous commands from users. The           porary policies to guide the strategic navigation of
    driving context (Xc), including information on cur-     the ego vehicle based on user instructions. These
    rent road conditions and other road users, forms        policy code snippets are structured as Python gen-
    the foundation for the planning process. This in-       erator functions, which gracefully unfold until the
    formation can be derived from sensor data with          completion of each policy.
                                             4989

   These generated code snippets involve calls to tinuous learning: positive feedback (i.e., the hu-
various functional primitives — specialized driving man is satisfied with the execution) results in the
APIs based on classical planning and control algo- code (Xp) being committed to the database to be
rithms. The API suite covers a broad spectrum of retrieved for reuse in the future. Otherwise, the
driving functions, including navigation functions feedback will serve as guidance for another round
like turning and lane changing, control functions of improvement. The new generation process can
such as waiting or proceeding, and perception func- be formulated as:
tions which involve monitoring the immediate driv-
ing environment, including other vehicles, pedestri- [Xr, X′p] = ℓ([Xsys, Xq, Xc, Xp, Xf ]), (2)
ans, traffic signals, and other functions like check-
ing the vehicle’s current speed or providing user where X′p is the improved code based on Xp and
feedback. The API documentation, which includes the human feedback Xf as a cue.
a complete list of these functional primitives and The database serves two purposes: firstly, as
their details, is provided in the Appendix. The a repository for autonomous driving knowledge,
same documentation is also included in the system offering insights into corner cases for continu-
message (Xsys). ous learning following the knowledge-driven au-
   The API suite provides substantial flexibility in tonomous driving paradigm (Wen et al., 2024); and
formulating driving policies. For example, Naviga- secondly, as the database is built with personal
tion APIs can be used to specify the vehicle’s future feedback, it automatically incorporates personal-
trajectory, dynamically creating waypoints based ized preferences in the interaction process. This
on map data and classical planning algorithms. methodology transforms the programming planner
Control APIs, on the other hand, help with precise from a static, open-loop system into a dynamic,
vehicle control by issuing momentary control sig- continuous learning framework, which we show in
nals. Perception APIs, like the check_red_light Section 4.4 that improved fundamentally compared
function in Table 1, can be used for identifying to baselines.
and tracking nearby traffic objects. This is vital for 4 Experiments and Results
actions that react to the immediate driving context,
enabling a closed-loop control policy. 4.1 Task Description
3.3 Human-in-the-Loop Learning The experiments utilize the official testing routes
An additional challenge arises from the phe- from the CARLA (under CC-BY License) leader-
nomenon known as “LLM hallucination", where board 1.0 (CARLA, 2020) but with a more chal-
LLMs may make up facts as their knowledge is lim- lenging setting. In each route, the agents start from
ited to the data they were trained on (Huang et al., a specific point. Originally, agents were provided
2023). This becomes problematic in the context of with a series of GPS-style coordinates to drive to
generating policy code, where LLMs might make a destination (Chen et al., 2019; Prakash et al.,
up non-existent API functions. Additionally, the 2021; Chitta et al., 2021; Toromanoff et al., 2020;
generation process of LLMs restricts that tokens Chen et al., 2021; Chekroun et al., 2023; Chen and
generated early cannot be modified within the cycle. Krähenbühl, 2022; Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
This constraint limits the models’ ability to revise 2022). However, in our setting, agents are given
initial responses, potentially leading to suboptimal only natural language navigation instructions based
solutions. on their current position (e.g., turn left at the next
   To address these challenges, we introduce a intersection). As our study mainly focuses on rea-
human-in-the-loop learning approach, based on soning and planning tasks, the driving context infor-
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis mation is crafted using a structured language gener-
et al., 2020) to ground LLMs to generate responses ator (Chen et al., 2024) derived from the CARLA’s
to the input queries based on custom knowledge privileged information, eliminating the influence
databases. The key process is that after a generated of perception.
policy code (Xp) has been executed, the human
passenger will provide feedback (Xf ) in natural 4.2 Evaluation Metrics
language, which, will be fed back into the LLM The evaluation metrics include (1) Route Comple-
together with Xp. This feedback loop enables con- tion (RC), which measures the percentage of the
        4990

    route distance that an agent completes; (2) Infrac-     loop learning process is conducted on the official
    tion Penalty (IP), which keeps track of various in-     training routes and concludes once the database
    fractions (e.g., collisions, running a red light) in    contains 50 programs.
    the simulation.      The IP aggregates these infrac-         We compare our programming planner-based
    tions committed by an agent as a geometric series.      agent with RL experts that have access to privi-
    Agents start with an ideal 1.0 base score, which        leged information, such as Roach (Zhang et al.,
    is reduced each time an infraction is committed;        2021) and TCP (Wu et al., 2022). It’s important
    (3) Driving Score (DS), the principal metric, is de-    to note that these comparisons aren’t necessarily
    fined as the product of the route completion and        fair. Our setting of following user instructions is
    the infraction penalty.                                 inherently more difficult than following waypoints.
    4.3  Implementation Details                             The comparison aims to reference previous works,
                                                            and the results can be found in Table 2.
    Our  programming    planner     leverages        GPT         From these results, we make the following obser-
Model APIs (gpt-4-turbo-preview and vations: Initially, without any few-shot examples,
gpt-3.5-turbo)(OpenAI, 2023) as the LLMs. the out-of-the-box LLM struggles with the precise
    Specifically, we use GPT-4 as the planning LLM          reasoning needed for complex closed-loop driving
    (ℓ). For the database implementation, we utilize        in CARLA. The 3-shot baseline also falls short,
    the open-source vector database Chroma(Chroma,          resulting in significantly lower scores according to
    2023), where the key is the embedding vector for        CARLA’s standard metrics. However, our program-
    the program description generated by GPT-3.5,           ming planner with 50 code snippets learned from
    and the value is the policy code itself, following      human feedback, performs on par with the Roach
    the approach in (Wang et al., 2023a).                   Expert RL baseline.                  Most of the programming
   To facilitate efficient retrieval, we employ planner’s failures stem from the trade-off made for
text-embedding-ada-002 APIs for text embed- the LLM low-level planning frequency. Here’s an
    ding. In the RAG process, we include the top-3          example of this failure:
retrieved programs in the prompt to provide ad- # Command : Alright , you can start driving .
ditional context for generating the driving policy. # Context Info :
The navigation instructions used in our experiments # There is a vehicle at a distance of 6.8 m.
        # It is moving at a speed of 0.0 m/s.
    are provided by (Shao et al., 2024). We generate        ##   It  is  at   an angle      of             1.9 degrees .
                                                                 The    angle      between  the  headings is 0.0  degrees .
    the driving environment context using a structured      #    My  current        speed is   0.0  m/s.
    language generator, following (Chen et al., 2024).      def     start_driving_with_front_vehicle_check () :
                                                                    ( is_front_vehicle ,
              The execution of an LMP involves using the             distance_to_front_vehicle ,
                                                                     speed_of_front_vehicle )
    Python exec function, which takes the LMP code                  if= check_front_vehicle ()
    as an input string, along with two dictionaries                           ( is_front_vehicle
                                                                         and        distance_to_front_vehicle  <  5
    defining the execution scope: (i) apis, contain-                     and  speed_of_front_vehicle       ==  0.0):
                                                                         yield   stop ()
    ing all driving APIs the code may call, and (ii)                else :speed_limit       =  check_speed_limit ()
    local_vars, initially empty, but later holding a                     yield                   proceed ( speed_limit )
    generator variable named policy once executed.               In this case, the vehicle could collide with a front
    4.4  Results                                            vehicle if it starts to move. This issue arises because
In the experiments, the programming plan- the LLM reasoning is based on the current context
    ner—without human-in-the-loop learning and RAG          information, not accounting for all potential future
    integration—is referred to as either the 0-shot or      actions of surrounding agents. However, due to the
    3-shot chain-of-thought baselines, in line with stan-   latency of LLM reasoning, it’s not feasible to em-
    dard practices (Wei et al., 2022b). Both baselines      ploy LLM to reason at every single timestamp. We
    use the same API documentation for all test routes.     leave this issue to be addressed in future research.
            In the few-shot setting, in-context examples    5       Discussion
are created by a human programmer proficient in
Python. These programmers are given API docu- 5.1 The Benefits and Risks of Driving with
    mentation and allowed to write and test their code                                Human Feedback Learning
    on the official training routes. The same examples      Many previous autonomous driving strategies have
    are used across all test routes. The human-in-the-      relied heavily on data-driven approaches, such as
        4991

reinforcement learning and meta-learning, facing stand the human needs for driving and embed hu-
challenges like data selection bias, long-tailed fail- man needs via code generation into existing driving
ure cases, lack of interpretability, and difficulties pipelines.
in transferring weights of models. Thus those RL- Besides, real-world driving demands interaction
based methods have poor sample efficiency and with other road users. Interacting with human-
it is quite challenging to collect massive amounts driven vehicles and understanding human behav-
of offline data to pretrain the model. To address ior poses a significant challenge in autonomous
these issues, our approach integrates human driver driving. Human drivers often rely on non-verbal
feedback with LLMs to steer the creation of driv- signals, such as slowing down to yield the right-
ing policy programs within the driving environ- of-way or using visible gestures to communicate
ments. Leveraging the advanced capabilities of with other road users. These non-verbal cues play
CodeLLMs and RAG, our proposed framework a vital role in communication on the road. In the
matches the performance of reinforcement learning- past, there have been numerous accidents involving
based methods, even under a more challenging con- autonomous driving systems because they behaved
dition where access to waypoints during driving is unexpectedly. In the future, LLMs with human
restricted. This demonstrates the potential of com- feedback learning can be utilized to enhance au-
bining human insights with the power of LLMs to tonomous driving systems, where they can incorpo-
enhance the capability of autonomous driving. rate context-rich information from various sources
  There are also some potential risks of human and also analyze drivers’ driving styles to better
feedback learning. Creating an efficient and sta- understand these social cues and make informed
ble continual learning mechanism is essential in decisions. By estimating other drivers’ character-
human feedback learning due to the absence of a istics (such as selfishness or altruism) and types
clear mathematical or logical method to accurately of social interaction (such as cooperation, conflict,
capture subjective human preferences. However, competition, coercion, or exchange) based on these
collecting human feedback from a limited demo- social cues, LLMs can improve autonomous driv-
graphic with similar behavior preferences can lead ing systems’ decision-making capabilities and over-
to skewed model performance, especially when all safety.
applied across diverse user groups or in contexts
affected by evaluators’ inherent biases. This issue 6
particularly appears in driving scenarios, where Conclusion
varying driving styles, such as aggressive or defen- In this paper, we proposed a human-centered
sive, significantly influence the feedback, under- autonomous driving learning pipeline with
scoring the need for a broad approach to feedback CodeLLMs supported by Retrieval-Augmented
collection to ensure the model’s safety, versatility, Generation (RAG). Our method exhibits strong
and fairness. learning abilities to embed human driving knowl-
5.2 Future Works edge and preference into the decision-making
        process of autonomous driving. We conducted
In autonomous driving, there exists an often over- interactive experiments in the CARLA autonomous
looked area — adaptability to the individual driv- driving simulator by letting experienced human
ing preferences of users. Traditional autonomous drivers provide feedback. After learning with
driving systems have largely ignored the personal- human feedback, our programming planner
ization factor, focusing instead on creating a cen- achieves much better performance than zero-shot
tralized and general solution. However, the core and few-shot chain-of-thought baselines. More
objective of the autonomous driving system is not importantly, our framework can perform com-
only transportation, but also to serve human needs. pelling results using only 50 committed code
This perspective highlights the notion that the au- snippets in the Knowledge Database for RAG
tonomous driving system should not only follow without any parameter updates. Although our
basic self-defined navigational commands but also framework has shown promising results in the
understand and adapt to the unique driving styles of current setting, there are still some limitations.
its users. To build better personalized autonomous Future improvements could focus on a better
driving systems, our proposed method provides a personalization and understanding of human
potential direction, that is using LLMs to under- behavior in real-world scenarios.
        4992

    Limitations                                              real-world large-scale vision-language benchmark
          While LLMs can act as a bridge to connect users    for map and traffic scene understanding. In CVPR,
                                                             pages 21819–21830.
        and vehicles, they have inherent limitations, in-
         cluding significant computational costs and high   CARLA. 2020. Autonomous Driving Leaderboard.
        latency. To enhance time efficiency during infer-   Raphael Chekroun, Marin Toromanoff, Sascha Hor-
          ence, we leverage RAG and human feedback learn-    nauer, and Fabien Moutarde. 2023. GRI: General
      ing to collect user input and optimize action code.    Reinforced Imitation and Its Application to Vision-
         However, this process also requires considerable    Based Autonomous Driving. Robotics, 12(5):127.
          time. Ideally, human feedback could be replaced   Dian Chen, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl.
         by another LLM acting as a code debugging agent,    2021. Learning To Drive From a World on Rails. In
    a promising area for future research.                    ICCV.
   A pertinent question is whether humans provide
optimal solutions during human feedback learning. Dian Chen and Philipp Krähenbühl. 2022. Learning
        Our experiments indicate that users may sometimes    From All Vehicles. In CVPR.
            mislead the autonomous driving system by pro-   Dian Chen, Brady Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp
       viding incorrect feedback, potentially endangering    Krähenbühl. 2019. Learning by Cheating. In CoRL.
          other road users. Consequently, our experiments   Long Chen, Oleg Sinavski, Jan Hünermann, Alice Karn-
        and research conclusions are currently limited to    sund, Andrew James Willmott, Danny Birch, Daniel
         simulation environments. There remains a signif-    Maund, and Jamie Shotton. 2024.   Driving with
         icant journey ahead to fully integrate LLMs into    LLMs: Fusing Object-Level Vector Modality for Ex-
            human-centric autonomous driving systems. The    plainable Autonomous Driving. In ICRA.
       primary objective of our paper is not to propose a   Kashyap Chitta, Aditya Prakash, and Andreas Geiger.
          framework ready for deployment in real vehicles    2021. NEAT: Neural Attention Fields for End-to-End
         but to introduce a novel human-centric framework    Autonomous Driving. In ICCV.
           for autonomous driving tasks and emphasize the   Chroma. 2023. The AI-native open-source embedding
    critical role of human-vehicle interaction in enhanc-    database.
    ing AI systems for human use.
    Ethical Statement                                       Can Cui, Yunsheng Ma, Xu Cao, Wenqian Ye, and Zi-
                                                             ran Wang. 2024a.  Drive as You Speak: Enabling
         We acknowledge that our work is aligned with the    Human-Like Interaction with Large Language Mod-
                                                             els in Autonomous Vehicles. In WACVW.
        ACL Code of the Ethics and will not raise ethical
        concerns. We do not use sensitive datasets/models   Can Cui, Yunsheng Ma, Xu Cao, Wenqian Ye, Yang
    that may cause any potential issues.                     Zhou, Kaizhao Liang, Jintai Chen, Juanwu Lu, Zi-
                                                             chong Yang, Kuei-Da Liao, Tianren Gao, Erlong Li,
                                                             Kun Tang, Zhipeng Cao, Tong Zhou, Ao Liu, Xinrui
    References                                               Yan, Shuqi Mei, Jianguo Cao, Ziran Wang, and Chao
                                                             Zheng. 2024b. A Survey on Multimodal Large Lan-
           Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu,    guage Models for Autonomous Driving. In WACVW.
       Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina   Thierry Deruyttere, Simon Vandenhende, Dusan Gruji-
         Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori Inkpen,    cic, Luc Van Gool, and Marie-Francine Moens. 2019.
          Jaime Teevan, Ruth Kikin-Gil, and Eric Horvitz.    Talk2Car: Taking Control of Your Self-Driving Car.
       2019. Guidelines for Human-AI Interaction. In CHI.    In EMNLP-IJCNLP.
Alex M. Andrew. 2003. Humans and Automation:
   System Design and Research Issues. Kybernetes, Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, An-
     32(9/10).                                               tonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. 2017. CARLA:
        An Open Urban Driving Simulator. In CoRL.
Jean-François Bonnefon, Azim Shariff, and Iyad Rah-
  wan. 2016. The social dilemma of autonomous ve- Lex Fridman. 2018. Human-Centered Autonomous
     hicles.     Science, 352(6293):1573–1576. Publisher:    Vehicle Systems: Principles of Effective Shared Au-
         American Association for the Advancement of Sci-    tonomy. arXiv.
     ence.                                                  Daocheng Fu, Wenjie Lei, Licheng Wen, Pinlong Cai,
          Xu Cao, Tong Zhou, Yunsheng Ma, Wenqian Ye, Can    Song Mao, Min Dou, Botian Shi, and Yu Qiao. 2024a.
           Cui, Kun Tang, Zhipeng Cao, Kaizhao Liang, Zi-    LimSim++: A Closed-Loop Platform for Deploying
            ran Wang, James M Rehg, et al. 2024. Maplm: A    Multimodal LLMs in Autonomous Driving. arXiv.
         4993

     Daocheng Fu, Xin Li, Licheng Wen, Min Dou, Pinlong   Ana-Maria Marcu, Long Chen, Jan Hünermann, Al-
      Cai, Botian Shi, and Yu Qiao. 2024b. Drive Like a    ice Karnsund, Benoit Hanotte, Prajwal Chidananda,
        Human: Rethinking Autonomous Driving with Large    Saurabh Nair, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall,
    Language Models. In WACVW.                             Jamie Shotton, and Oleg Sinavski. 2023. LingoQA:
                                                           Video Question Answering for Autonomous Driving.
    Google PAIR. 2019. People + AI Guidebook.              arXiv.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Laksh Nanwani, Anmol Agarwal, Kanishk Jain,
       Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.    Raghav Prabhakar, Aaron Monis, Aditya Mathur,
         2021. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Un-    Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, AH Abdul Hafez,
    derstanding. In ICLR.                                  Vineet Gandhi, and K Madhava Krishna. 2023.
                                                           Instance-level semantic maps for vision language
      Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong,    navigation. In RO-MAN, pages 507–512. IEEE.
           Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
        Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting   OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv.
     Liu. 2023. A Survey on Hallucination in Large Lan-
        guage Models: Principles, Taxonomy, Challenges,   Raja Parasuraman and Victor Riley. 1997. Humans and
    and Open Questions. arXiv.                             Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse.    Human
                                                           Factors, 39(2):230–253.
    Shu Ishida, Gianluca Corrado, George Fedoseev, Hud-
    son Yeo, Lloyd Russell, Jamie Shotton, João F. Hen-   Mohammad Taher Pilehvar and Jose Camacho-Collados.
         riques, and Anthony Hu. 2024. LangProp: A code    2019. WiC: the Word-in-Context Dataset for Evalu-
       optimization framework using Language Models ap-    ating Context-Sensitive Meaning Representations. In
    plied to driving. arXiv.                               NAACL. ArXiv:1808.09121 [cs].
  Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-   Aditya Prakash, Kashyap Chitta, and Andreas Geiger.
      taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large Lan-    2021. Multi-Modal Fusion Transformer for End-to-
      guage Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners. In NeurIPS.    End Autonomous Driving. In CVPR.
   Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio   Nivedita Rufus, Kanishk Jain, Unni Krishnan R Nair, Vi-
        Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-    neet Gandhi, and K Madhava Krishna. 2021. Ground-
       rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-    ing linguistic commands to navigable regions. In
      täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.    IROS, pages 8593–8600. IEEE.
          Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-   Hao Shao, Yuxuan Hu, Letian Wang, Steven L. Waslan-
    Intensive NLP Tasks. In NeurIPS.                       der, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. 2024.    LMDrive:
    Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol    Closed-Loop End-to-End Driving with Large Lan-
         Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy    guage Models. In CVPR.
  Zeng. 2023. Code as Policies: Language Model Chonghao Sima, Katrin Renz, Kashyap Chitta, Li Chen,
    Programs for Embodied Control. In ICRA.                Hanxue Zhang, Chengen Xie, Ping Luo, Andreas
    Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022.    Geiger, and Hongyang Li. 2023. DriveLM: Driving
           TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Human    with Graph Visual Question Answering. arXiv.
    Falsehoods. In ACL.                                   Xiaoyu Tian, Junru Gu, Bailin Li, Yicheng Liu, Chenxu
  Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Ling-    Hu, Yang Wang, Kun Zhan, Peng Jia, Xianpeng Lang,
      ming Zhang. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by Chat-    and Hang Zhao. 2024. DriveVLM: The Convergence
       GPT Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large    of Autonomous Driving and Large Vision-Language
       Language Models for Code Generation. In NeurIPS.    Models. arXiv.
    arXiv.                                                Marin Toromanoff, Emilie Wirbel, and       Fabien
       Yunsheng Ma, Can Cui, Xu Cao, Wenqian Ye, Peiran    Moutarde. 2020. End-to-End Model-Free Reinforce-
           Liu, Juanwu Lu, Amr Abdelraouf, Rohit Gupta,    ment Learning for Urban Driving Using Implicit Af-
          Kyungtae Han, Aniket Bera, James M. Rehg, and    fordances. In CVPR.
  Ziran Wang. 2024. LaMPilot: An Open Bench- Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
          mark Dataset for Autonomous Driving with Lan-    dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
    guage Model Programs. In CVPR.                         Anima Anandkumar. 2023a. Voyager: An Open-
                                                           Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Mod-
     Srikanth Malla, Chiho Choi, Isht Dwivedi, Joon Hee    els. arXiv.
    Choi, and Jiachen Li. 2023.       DRAMA: Joint Risk
    Localization and Captioning in Driving. In WACV.      Wenhai Wang, Jiangwei Xie, ChuanYang Hu, Haoming
                                                           Zou, Jianan Fan, Wenwen Tong, Yang Wen, Silei
       Jiageng Mao, Junjie Ye, Yuxi Qian, Marco Pavone,     Wu, Hanming Deng, Zhiqi Li, Hao Tian, Lewei Lu,
    and Yue Wang. 2023.        A Language Agent for Au-    Xizhou Zhu, Xiaogang Wang, Yu Qiao, and Jifeng
    tonomous Driving. arXiv.                               Dai. 2023b.       DriveMLM: Aligning Multi-Modal
        4994

    Large Language Models with Behavioral Planning
    States for Autonomous Driving. arXiv.
   Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
    Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
    Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
    Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
    Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022a. Emer-
    gent Abilities of Large Language Models. Transac-
    tions on Machine Learning Research.
    Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
    Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and
    Denny Zhou. 2022b. Chain-of-Thought Prompting
    Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models.   In
    NeurIPS.
    Licheng Wen, Daocheng Fu, Xin Li, Xinyu Cai, Tao
    Ma, Pinlong Cai, Min Dou, Botian Shi, Liang He,
    and Yu Qiao. 2024. DiLu: A Knowledge-Driven Ap-
    proach to Autonomous Driving with Large Language
    Models. In ICLR.
      Penghao Wu, Xiaosong Jia, Li Chen, Junchi Yan,
    Hongyang Li, and Yu Qiao. 2022. Trajectory-guided
    Control Prediction for End-to-end Autonomous Driv-
    ing: A Simple yet Strong Baseline. In NeurIPS.
      Yang Xing, Chen Lv, Dongpu Cao, and Peng Hang.
    2021. Toward human-vehicle collaboration: Review
    and perspectives on human-centered collaborative
    automated driving. Transportation Research Part C:
    Emerging Technologies.
   Ke Yang, Jiateng Liu, John Wu, Chaoqi Yang, Yi R.
    Fung, Sha Li, Zixuan Huang, Xu Cao, Xingyao
    Wang, Yiquan Wang, Heng Ji, and Chengxiang Zhai.
    2024a.    If LLM Is the Wizard, Then Code Is the
    Wand: A Survey on How Code Empowers Large Lan-
    guage Models to Serve as Intelligent Agents. ICLR
    Workshop on LLM Agents.
 Yi Yang, Qingwen Zhang, Ci Li, Daniel Simões Marta,
    Nazre Batool, and John Folkesson. 2024b. Human-
    Centric Autonomous Systems With LLMs for User
    Command Reasoning. In WACVW.
   Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
    Thomas  L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao,    and   Karthik
    Narasimhan. 2023.    Tree of Thoughts: Deliber-
    ate Problem Solving with Large Language Models.
    arXiv preprint. ArXiv:2305.10601 [cs].
  Jianhao Yuan, Shuyang Sun, Daniel Omeiza, Bo Zhao,
    Paul Newman, Lars Kunze, and Matthew Gadd. 2024.
    RAG-Driver: Generalisable Driving Explanations
    with Retrieval-Augmented In-Context Learning in
    Multi-Modal Large Language Model. arXiv.
Zhejun Zhang, Alexander Liniger, Dengxin Dai, Fisher
    Yu, and Luc Van Gool. 2021.       End-to-End Ur-
    ban Driving by Imitating a Reinforcement Learning
    Coach. In ICCV.
       Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex
    Smola. 2023. Automatic Chain of Thought Prompt-
    ing in Large Language Models. In ICLR.

        4995

