arXiv:2302.00551v1 [cs.SE] 31 Jan 2023










Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case for
        Validation of ADAS/ADS Functions


    Víctor J. Expósito Jiménez1, Helmut Martin1, Christian Schwarzl1,
                Georg Macher2, and Eugen Brenner2

    1 Virtual Vehicle Research GmbH, Inffeldgasse 21a, 8010 Graz, Austria
{victor.expositojimenez,helmut.martin,christian.schwarzl}@v2c2.at
    2 Graz University of Technology, Rechbauerstraße 12, 8010, Graz, Austria
                 {georg.macher,brenner}@tugraz.at



    Abstract. Safety in the automotive domain is a well-known topic, which
    has been in constant development in the past years. The complexity of
    new systems that add more advanced components in each function has
    opened new trends that have to be covered from the safety perspective. In
    this case, not only the specification and requirements have to be covered
    but also scenarios, which cover all relevant information of the vehicle
    environment. Many of them are not yet still sufficient defined or con-
    sidered. In this context, Safety of the Intended Functionality (SOTIF)
    appears to ensure the system when it might fail because of technological
    shortcomings or misuses by users.
    An identification of the plausibly insufficiencies of ADAS/ADS functions
    has to be done to discover the potential triggering conditions that can
    lead to these unknown scenarios, which might effect a hazardous be-
    haviour. The main goal of this publication is the definition of an use
    case to identify these triggering conditions that have been applied to the
    collision avoidance function implemented in our self-developed mobile
    Hardware-in-Loop (HiL) platform.

    Keywords: Triggering Conditions · SOTIF · ADAS · Automated Driv-
    ing Systems


1 Introduction

The validation of the Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS)/Automated
Driving Systems (ADS) has been a topic for numerous research works due to the
complexity of functions that have been exponentially growing over the years,
since there are more components and software included in each function and
their relationships between them (e.g. AI algorithms,...) are getting more chal-
lenging . Reported public cases [1] [2] with human deaths have occurred in the
last years, which have given an unreliable picture of the current status of the
automated driven cars to the public view. Many standards have been developed
to provide a common framework and to overcome these accidents as much a
possible in the future in which all aspects related to system dependability have

2 V. Expósito et al.

to be covered. The dependability of a function can be split into three main
parts according to the origin of the hazard. Functional Safety hazards, effected
by malfunctions based on hardware and systematics faults, are covered in the
ISO26262 [3]. Cybersecurity is covered in the ISO/SAE 21434 [4], which is fo-
cused on external threads. The ISO21448, Safety of the Intended Functionality
(SOTIF) [5], standard is being developed to cover the gap that has been added
due to the new requirements and safety standards that ADAS/AD functions
developments have to face. With more functions dependent on complex sensors
and algorithms, more unknown scenarios could occur in which the function is
not designed for. The main goal of the SOTIF standard is to minimize the un-
known hazardous scenarios due to technical shortcomings or misuses, specially
the ones that can lead to hazardous situations. Many researches [6] [7] have been
trying to reuse and link part of the processes described in the ISO26262 into the
SOTIF standard, such as Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA) or
System-Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA). Another important point for SO-
TIF is the identification of the limitation of each technology used for automated
driving [8], which gives more knowledge in order to identify and understand
the cause of these unknown scenarios. To make the steps more explicit for the
safety argumentation, the UL4600 [9] provides a checklist of necessary elements
to ensure that a function is safe in all aspects.
   The complexity of covering all possible variations and scenarios that can oc-
cur, make validation of ADAS/AD functions a hard task and there are different
approaches to face this goal. For example, the validation approach based only
on real driven miles data would be unpractical and the cost of the process would
be unacceptable [10]. Another way to support this task would be through simu-
lations. During the last years, new environment simulators specifically designed
for this domain, such as CARLA [11] or SVL Simulator [12], have been devel-
oped. The main issue with this kind of validation is the creation of the realistic
high-fidelity sensor models, which are highly complex to develop and also need
huge computational resources and high-performance machines [13] as well as
the generation of scenarios [14] to cover all possible scenario variations. Authors
in [15] also include machine learning approaches to get the conclusion that the
lack of meaningful trained data makes this approach not ready to fully cover the
whole SOTIF argumentation yet. On the other hand, to avoid the issues pre-
viously commented, the authors in [16] present an approach purely statistical,
which could provide a quantitative argument of functions validation. Since some
concepts could be reused in our research, in this case, the direction of our re-
search is focused on the decomposition of the function to identify the triggering
conditions according to the function design.
   One of the main step of a SOTIF analysis is the definition of the Operation
Design Domain (ODD), according to the standards such as ISO21448 or UL4600.
An ODD can be defined as the intended behavior within defined environmental
condition that the function has been designed to work on. The definition of the
ODD must include all necessary parameters, which make the definition meaning-
ful such as constraints to road conditions. There are different approaches for the

    Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case 3



    <




    Function  (mm) {|




    pion;




    Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed triggering conditions methodology


definition of a ODD, from the described in the PEGASUS project [17] in which
the ODD definition is split into six different layers according to the functionality
of the parameters to the description given in the SAKURA project [18] or the
provided by ASAM in ASAM OpenODD [19]. The authors in [20] present an
overview of available approaches for the most common ODD definition. These
approaches provide us with the necessary taxonomy to give the basis to create
a triggering conditions list. This publication gives an overview of triggering con-
ditions in automated driving [21], but in our approach, it is based on scenario
level and not the system as it is described.
   The structure of the paper at hand is as follows: our approach is explained in
the next section. Section 2 goes through all blocks of the proposed use case and
its implementation in the collision avoidance function of our Hardware-in-Loop
(HiL) platform. Finally, section 3 shows the conclusions and the future outlook
of our research.



    2 Use Case and Methodology


The proposed methodology is shown in Figure 1 in which the used blocks and
their relationships are depicted. The main goal of this publication is to show the
key ideas and process of our use case to give the elements to provide a SOTIF
argumentation. This is described as a brief basis and further description will be
given in following research work as a more mature methodology.

4 V. Expósito et al.

2.1 ADAS/ADS Function Description

In this first block, the function and its functionality as well as relevant technical
aspects are given in order to be able to know the behaviour of the function.
The use case example in this publication is the collision avoidance function im-
plemented in our self-developed mobile Hardware-in-Loop (HiL) platform called
SPIDER [22] [23]. A collision avoidance function could work in two ways, as an
Automatic Emergency Brake (AEB) or providing an alternative way/evasive ma-
neuver to reach the target location. For simplicity, only the AEB is implemented
at this moment on the robot and it will be used in the analysis in this paper.
The function uses four 16-lines lidar sensors located at each corner (Front-Left,
Front-Right, Back-Left, Back-Right) to provide redundancy where each point
is seen, at least, by two sensors and leave the centre of the robot for different
flexible setups in the future as Figure 2 shows. The data from the lidars are
fused to generate an occupancy grid, which shows the objects surrounding the
robot and sends the activation signal to start the emergency brake in case one
object enters within the delimited zone as the danger zone. According to the
SAE J3016 Standard [24], it is a Level 4 function since the dynamic driving task
fallback has no human interaction.



    imaginary front of SPDER 10Dₘₑₜₑᵣₛ range.


        —
    i | |   1
            |i


                                                 Sensor
    FoV Sensor 4 (BL)    FoV                      3(BR)

        SPIDER dimensions with vehicle target (Chassis)


    Fig. 2. Hardware setup of the collision avoidance function on the HiL Platform (Field
    of View - FoV, Front Left - FL, Front Right - FR, Back Right - BR, Back Left - BL)


   To guarantee that there is no collision on the nominal scenario, the Responsibility-
Sensitive Safety (RSS) [25] model was implemented as the minimum distance
before the emergency brake is activated, which formula was adapted for our use
case. RSS model was chosen since it provides a proven [26] safe distance accord-
ing to our robot parameters. Ego vehicle is defined as the main actor of interest
in the scenario, sometimes is also refereed as Vehicle Under Test (VUT). On the

    Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case                                  5

other hand, the target vehicle is considered as an element of the scenario and its
   behaviour is described in the scenario definition. The assumption of zero speed
of the vehicle located at front of the ego vehicle(target vehicle) was set to zero
     due to the ODD is only taking into account static objects. Therefore, the RSS
    equation of the used function is given as follows:
    d [ 1      2     (v + ρa     )2 ]
      min = vrρ + 2 amax,accelρ   +     r 2a     max,accel
        min,brake     +

        [x]+ := max{x, 0}.                                                   (2.1)

      – dmin: Minimum distance to ensure that there is no crash with the obstacle.
    – vr: Current velocity of the SPIDER (m/s)
    – ρ: Response time in seconds.
    – amax,accel: Maximum acceleration of the robot (m/s2).
    – amax,brake: Minimum braking acceleration of the robot (m/s2).


    2.2 Operational Design Domain

          The defined ODD for our use case is a simple one-way road as shown in Figure 3
    in which there is a static object located at the end of the road within the intended
         driving path of the robot vehicle. In the definition of this ODD, clear weather
            conditions as well as dry asphalt are assumed, but these conditions would be
      modified as a part of the test scenarios in the following sections to identify the
          triggering conditions of the function. The ego-vehicle, our robot, drives with
    constant velocity towards the object.

     – Dobject: Distance between the static object and the robot.
     – Drss: Distance calculated by using the RSS equation from (2.1).
          – Dρ: The distance that the robot travels until it perceives the object, makes
        a decision, and sends an actuation signal.
           – Dact: The distance between the robot activates the actuation process and it
        is finished.
     – Dbrake the distance necessary to brake the robot until velocity is zero. Dbrake =
        Dact + Dρ. In nominal situations, Dbrake = Drss.
        – Dperception: the perception range of the sensors. Dperception should be longer
        than Dobject and Dbrake.
     – μ: the friction factor of the road.

            According to the technical parameters of the function (vr: 50km/h, ρ: 1 sec-
          ond, amax,accel: 2.0m/s2, and amax,brake: 5.0m/s2), and the used RSS model, is
             assumed that the maximum RSS minimum distance (Drss) will always be smaller
    than the range of the perception sensors (Drss,max < Dperception).

    6 V. Expósito et al.


                 ;              :

                          z     |
               [TR    Dace      H
                 :    Drie
        HE

        Fig. 3. Operational Design Domain (ODD) for the selected use case

2.3 Triggering Conditions List
According to the ISO21448 [5] the triggering conditions are the specific condi-
tions of a scenario that serve as an initiator for a subsequent system reaction
leading to hazardous behaviour. To identify the possible conditions that can
bring up the function to unknown hazards, parameters of the defined ODD will
be modified. An own database with the potential triggering conditions based
on the taxonomy described in Annex C of the ISO21448[5] and the BSI stan-
dard [27] was developed for this purpose. This database includes categories and
different levels of subcategories, which adds granularity to each subcategory.
For example, the main category is at the top (e.g. environmental conditions,
road conditions,...) and the more granular conditions are at the bottom (e.g.
heavy snow). The main category, environmental conditions in this example, fol-
lows other subcategories such as the weather conditions or illumination and,
then, these subcategories are split again into other subcategories. In the case
of weather conditions, this subcategory is split into rain, snow, fog and other
climate conditions to continue with more fined granularity, which includes dif-
ferent intensities as light, medium and heavy.. The main purpose of using this
approach is to provide granularity to cover the maximum variety of situations,
which should help to discover more shortcomings of function during the analysis.

    2.4           Relevant Scenarios
    In our use case, a scenario is defined as the combination of the previously defined
    ODD combined with potential triggering conditions. Based on this definition,
    the relevant scenarios are the compilation of scenarios that includes the selected
    triggering conditions in which the output of the function will be analysed to know
    whether the selected triggering condition could lead to a hazardous behaviour.
    In this step, only the triggering conditions that makes senses for the defined
    ODD will be taken into account. For simplicity, in a first iteration only a single
    triggering condition is added to the ODD to better identify the cause and origin
    of the hazard.

        Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case 7

2.5 Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment

HARA methodology is always performed in Functional Safety processes in which
associated hazards to the system are analysed and classified according to the level
of danger and caused injuries. This classification used the Automotive Safety In-
tegrity Level (ASIL) which uses the parameters, Exposure (E), which is the
possibility of occurrence of the hazard within the operation situation; Severity
(S), which is the estimation of the harm that the hazard might cause; and Con-
trollability (C) that is ability to avoid the harm (see ISO262626 [3] part 3). But
unlike the process implemented in fuctional safety standard, the ASIL level is
not used in the SOTIF analysis process and only the identification of the hazards
are used.
   As a part of the HARA analysis and the given scenario, the following iden-
tified hazards can be extracted: "a collision due to the inability to completely
brake before reaching an obstacle" and "activation of the emergency brake due
to a false object detection"

2.6 Qualitative Analysis

In this step, the impact of the defined scenarios on the function has to be anal-
ysed to know if they could lead to a performance limitation which could further
effect a hazard. To do this, first, the function is split into the three main cate-
gories: perception, decision, and actuation. The perception part is also divided
into perception sense and perception algo, a shorter reference to perception al-
gorithms. This differentiation is done to separate the part in which perception
only provides data from the perceived reality through sensor input and percep-
tion algo in which information is extracted based on that perceived data to get
any environmental information, e.g. objects, driving road. In this use case, the
perception sense includes the sensor drivers, data fusion, and some data post-
processes like filtering ground from the point clouds. The block perception algo
includes the costmap generator, which generates an occupancy grid from the fil-
tered point cloud to determine the objects that surround the SPIDER. Decision
part includes the node, called collision detector, that goes through the generated
occupancy grid and detects the closest object and its distance to the robot. The
output of the node is the trigger of the emergency brake in case the object vio-
lates the calculated allowed minimum distance or the object distance if an object
is detected but the emergency brake is not yet necessary. Finally, the actuation
part is done by the commands to steering, braking and propulsion. In the given
use case it includes the emergency brake from the SPIDER. The main reason for
this categorization is to identify the components and their location in the system
architecture in which the performance limitations could occur. For this reason,
collaboration with domain experts and developers is crucial to better identify
the origin of the hazards. A discussion has to be done for each selected scenario
to identify how it could affect the function output. For example, for the scenario
that includes medium or high snow level, these specific conditions may affect the
perception sense part of the function, since it can include ghost points in the

8 V. Expósito et al.

perceived data, and the severity of the effect of the limitation is further rated by
NO/Low/Medium/High (S0-S3). Therefore, this triggering condition could lead
to the previously identified hazard "activation of the emergency brake due to
false object detection". Another specific scenario is the one in which the surface
is slippery due to heavy rain. This kind of surface reduces the friction of the
wheels (actuation part) and increases the distance necessary to completely stop
the robot. This triggering condition has an impact on the surface friction of the
ODD and could lead to the hazard "a collision due to the inability to completely
brake before reaching an obstacle". Similar discussions have to be done through
the whole list of selected scenarios to identify the potential hazardous scenarios.
An excerpt of this analysis can be shown in Figure 4. In this use case, it was
assumed the controllability (C) of the function is always C3 since it is a level 4
function and no backup operator is implemented.




    01.0 ps, raion res








    Fig. 4. Triggering Conditions Analysis Sheet Excerpt




2.7 Testing and Evaluation

The first step in this process is the definition of the Key Performance Indica-
tors (KPIs), which captures the behaviour in a nominal scenario and set the
considered acceptable criteria to release the function. This nominal scenario,
sometimes also called functional scenario, is the one used in optimal conditions
without the inclusion of any of the triggering conditions. An example of a KPI
could be Time To Collision (TTC) [28], which represents the time that the ego
vehicle needs until it reaches the target vehicle or an obstacle according to the
current ego and target velocities and its distance between the two vehicles. This
metric can be defined by the formula (2.2). Similar to RSS formula (2.1), it is
assumed that vtarget = 0 since there is a static object instead of a target vehicle
defined in the ODD.

        T T C = d/(vego − vtarget). (2.2)

        Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case 9

   Afterwards, the results obtained in the different levels of the verification and
validation procedures have to be compared with the nominal conditions and
ensure they are within the defined acceptable limits.

2.8 SOTIF Modifications

The main goal of applying SOTIF measures is to improve the output of the
function and minimise the risk level that applied triggering conditions might lead
to. Following the goal of the the principle of ALARP (As Low As Reasonably
Practicable) [29], which assumes that the efforts to achieve zero risk could be
not feasible and it has to be taken into account the necessary efforts needed
to reduce the risk as much as reasonable. For example, there are some cases
in which it is not possible to further risk reduction or the associated efforts to
reduce it are not worth it. Returning to the proposed use case, in that case
where a weather conditions is included as potential triggering conditions in the
scenario as heavy snow, the visibility is drastically reduced . There is a chance
that the snow could limit the perception range of the sensors and it can lead to
the previously defined hazard: "a collision due to the inability to completely brake
before reaching an obstacle" in which the relationship Dperception < Dbrake could
apply to lead to the specified hazard. According to the situation, modifications
have to be applied to improve the output on the specified scenario. For example,
diversity of sensor technologies, which are stronger against the described issue or
an external hardware to measure the specific triggering condition (fog level on
the environment) could be applied to mitigate the occurrence of the hazard. In
cases in which the effectiveness of the SOTIF measures are not enough to pass
the defined acceptance criteria level, these scenarios have to be considered and
evaluated within the "Residual Risk Evaluation" block.

2.9 Residual Risk Quantification

In case the maximum efforts to minimize the risks are reached and there is not
other possible way or feasible way to further improve the function, the evaluation
of the existing residual risk has to be calculated. The risk could be expressed in
a function as follows:

        R = f (S, O)
   According to the given formula, the risk (R) can be defined by the severity (S)
and probability of occurrence (O). In this function, the severity is the specified
in the analysis for the associated hazard. On the other hand, finding the right
occurrence probabilities of each triggering condition presents a more complex
problem since there are a wide variety of situations from weather to road condi-
tions. Moreover, finding or calculating these probabilities could change between
countries, where the availability of some of them may not be publicly accessible,
which makes the problem even harder. At the end of this block, a quantitative
evaluation of each identified risk (R0...RN) should be provided. For example, the

10 V. Expósito et al.

number of kilometres or the number of hours until the function could lead to a
hazard.

2.10 SOTIF Argumentation

Finally, the output of the previous blocks, which includes the carried out mea-
sures covered by functional modification and verification measures, such as sim-
ulations and testing, as well as the remained evaluated risks for each triggering
condition, are included as inputs for the results of the SOTIF argumentation
where both, reports (e.g. identified triggering conditions, relevant scenarios...)
and metrics (e.g. number of hours until hazards behavior appears, KPIs,...),
should be included.

3 Outlook

In this publication, a methodology to extract and evaluate the triggering condi-
tions of an ADAS/ADS function is described. Since driven kilometres or simula-
tions may not be enough in some situations, by using the introduced approach,
a profound understanding of the system as well as the discovery of unknown
hazardous scenarios could be provided. The addition of the triggering conditions
analysis in theuse case helps the engineers to discover the ones that might lead
to a hazard, and also provide more parameters in order to evaluate the risks
of the function. For this purpose, the paper goes through all blocks of the pro-
posed approach in which a description and a goal for each one is given as well as
the relationship between them. The use case is illustrated by using the collision
avoidance function implementation in our mobile robot HiL platform .
   In future research works, the residual risk evaluation will be investigated in
more detail to be able to provide a quantitative argument at the end of the
process, which can provide specific metrics (e.g. validated number of kilometres)
that will be used to characterize the safety of a function to achieve the demanded
acceptance criteria. Moreover, in the following research, we want to extend this
methodology in different approaches of the collision avoidance function to see
how different sensor setups (e.g., RADAR+LIDAR, RADAR+LIDAR+CAMERA)
can affect the function validation by combination of simulation and real-world
testing.

Acknowledgments

Research leading to these results has been performed in the project FRACTAL
A Cognitive Fractal and Secure EDGE based on an unique Open-Safe-Reliable-
Low Power Hardware Platform Node, under grant agreement No 877056. The
project is co funded by grants from Germany, Austria, Finland, France, Norway,
Latvia, Belgium, Italy, Switzerland, and Czech Republic and -Electronic Com-
ponent Systems for European Leadership Joint Undertaking (ECSEL JU). The

        Triggering Conditions Analysis and Use Case                             11

    publication was written at Virtual Vehicle Research GmbH in Graz and partially
          funded within the COMET K2 Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies
         from the Austrian Federal Ministry for Climate Action (BMK), the Austrian
         Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic Affairs (BMDW), the Province of
    Styria (Dept. 12) and the Styrian Business Promotion Agency (SFG).

    References

 1. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). (2020) Collision between a
    Sport Utility Vehicle Operating with Partial Driving Automation and a Crash
    Attenuator, Mountain View, California, March 23, 2018. [Online]. Available:
    https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/HAR2001.pdf
 2. J.-F. Bonnefon, 18 THE UBER ACCIDENT, 2021, pp. 93–98.
 3. “ISO26262: Road vehicles — Functional safety,” International Organization for
    Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, 2018.
 4. “ISO/SAE 21434:2021 Road vehicles — Cybersecurity engineering,” International
    Organization for Standardization, Standard, 2021.
 5. “ISO 21448: Road vehicles — Safety of the intended functionality,” International
    Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, 2021.
 6. M. Khatun, M. Glaß, and R. Jung, “Scenario-based extended hara incorporat-
    ing functional safety and sotif for autonomous driving,” in ESREL-30th European
    Safety and Reliability Conference, November 2020.
 7. D. Kinalzyk, “Sotif process and methods in combination with functional safety,”
    in Systems, Software and Services Process Improvement, M. Yilmaz, P. Clarke,
    R. Messnarz, and M. Reiner, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
    2021, pp. 612–623.
 8. H. Martin, B. Winkler, S. Grubmüller, and D. Watzenig, “Identification of perfor-
    mance limitations of sensing technologies for automated driving,” in 2019 IEEE
    International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2019, pp. 1–6.
 9. “Ul4600 standard for safety: Evaluation of autonomous products,” International
    Organization for Standardization, Standard, 2021.
10. N. Kalra and S. M. Paddock, “Driving to safety: How many miles of driving would
    it take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability?” Transportation Research
    Part A: Policy and Practice, vol. 94, pp. 182–193, 2016. [Online]. Available:
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965856416302129
11. A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, “CARLA: An open
    urban driving simulator,” in Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot
    Learning, 2017, pp. 1–16.
12. G. Rong, B. H. Shin, H. Tabatabaee, Q. Lu, S. Lemke, M. Možeiko, E. Boise,
    G. Uhm, M. Gerow, S. Mehta et al., “Lgsvl simulator: A high fidelity simulator for
    autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03778, 2020.
13. B. Schlager, S. Muckenhuber, S. Schmidt, H. Holzer, R. Rott, F. M. Maier,
    K. Saad, M. Kirchengast, G. Stettinger, D. Watzenig, and J. Ruebsam,
    “State-of-the-art sensor models for virtual testing of advanced driver assistance
    systems/autonomous driving functions,” SAE International Journal of Connected
    and Automated Vehicles, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 233–261, oct 2020. [Online]. Available:
    https://doi.org/10.4271/12-03-03-0018
14. C. Pilz, G. Steinbauer, M. Schratter, and D. Watzenig, “Development of a scenario
    simulation platform to support autonomous driving verification,” in 2019 IEEE

    12   V. Expósito et al.

    International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2019, pp.
    1–7.
15. A. Abdulazim, M. Elbahaey, and A. Mohamed, “Putting safety of intended
    functionality sotif into practice,” in SAE WCX Digital Summit. SAE
    International, apr 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.4271/2021-01-0196
16. J. Vaicenavicius, T. Wiklund, A. Grigaite, A. Kalkauskas, I. Vysniauskas, and
    S. D. Keen, “Self-driving car safety quantification via component-level analysis,”
    SAE International Journal of Connected and Automated Vehicles, vol. 4, no. 1,
    pp. 35–45, mar 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.4271/12-04-01-0004
17. M. Scholtes, L. Westhofen, L. R. Turner, K. Lotto, M. Schuldes, H. Weber, N. Wa-
    gener, C. Neurohr, M. H. Bollmann, F. Körtke, J. Hiller, M. Hoss, J. Bock, and
    L. Eckstein, “6-layer model for a structured description and categorization of urban
    traffic and environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 59 131–59 147, 2021.
18. JAMA and SAKURA. (2021) Automated Driving Safety Evaluation Framework
    Ver. 1.0 Guidelines for Safety Evaluation of Automated Driving Technology. [On-
    line]. Available: http://www.jama-english.jp/publications/Automated_Driving_
    Safety_Evaluation_Framework_Ver1.0.pdf
19. ASAM e. V. (2021) ASAM OpenODD. [Online]. Available: https://www.asam.
    net/project-detail/asam-openodd/
20. M. Ito, “Odd description methods for automated driving vehicle and verifiability
    for safety,” JUCS - Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 27, no. 8, pp.
    796–810, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3897/jucs.72333
21. A. Mekki-Mokhtar, J.-P. Blanquart, J. Guiochet, D. Powell, and M. Roy, “Safety
    trigger conditions for critical autonomous systems,” in 2012 IEEE 18th Pacific Rim
    International Symposium on Dependable Computing, 2012, pp. 61–69.
22. V. J. Expósito Jiménez, C. Schwarzl, and H. Martin, “Evaluation of an indoor
    localization system for a mobile robot,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on
    Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2019, pp. 1–5.
23. VIRTUAL VEHICLE Research GmbH. (2021) SPIDER: Mobile Platform for the
    Development and Testing of Autnomous Driving Functions. [Online]. Available:
    https://www.v2c2.at/spider/
24. “Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for
    On-Road Motor Vehicles ,” SAE International, Standard, 2021.
25. S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Shammah, and A. Shashua, “On a formal model of safe and
    scalable self-driving cars,” 2018.
26. B. Gassmann, F. Oboril, C. Buerkle, S. Liu, S. Yan, M. S. Elli, I. Alvarez,
    N. Aerrabotu, S. Jaber, P. van Beek, D. Iyer, and J. Weast, “Towards standard-
    ization of av safety: C++ library for responsibility sensitive safety,” in 2019 IEEE
    Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2019, pp. 2265–2271.
27. “BSI PAS 1883:2020-Operational design domain (ODD) taxonomy for an auto-
    mated driving system (ADS). Specification,” The British Standards Institution,
    Standard, 2020.
28. V. E. Balas and M. M. Balas, “Driver assisting by inverse time to collision,” in
    2006 World Automation Congress, 2006, pp. 1–6.
29. M. Malekzadeh and I. Bate, “Making an alarp decision of sufficient testing,” in
    2014 IEEE 15th International Symposium on High-Assurance Systems Engineer-
    ing, 2014, pp. 57–64.

