arXiv:2410.23262v2 [cs.CV] 4 Nov 2024










EMMA: End-to-End Multimodal Model
      for Autonomous Driving




Jyh-Jing Hwang∗†, Runsheng Xu∗, Hubert Lin‡, Wei-Chih Hung‡, Jingwei Ji, Kristy Choi
       Di Huang, Tong He, Paul Covington, Benjamin Sapp, Yin Zhou, James Guo
                          Dragomir Anguelov, Mingxing Tan†

                                     Waymo LLC


        Abstract

        We introduce EMMA, an End-to-end Multimodal Model for Autonomous driving.
        Built on a multi-modal large language model foundation, EMMA directly maps
        raw camera sensor data into various driving-specific outputs, including planner
        trajectories, perception objects, and road graph elements. EMMA maximizes
        the utility of world knowledge from the pre-trained large language models, by
        representing all non-sensor inputs (e.g. navigation instructions and ego vehicle
        status) and outputs (e.g. trajectories and 3D locations) as natural language text.
        This approach allows EMMA to jointly process various driving tasks in a unified
        language space, and generate the outputs for each task using task-specific prompts.
        Empirically, we demonstrate EMMA’s effectiveness by achieving state-of-the-art
        performance in motion planning on nuScenes as well as competitive results on the
        Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD). EMMA also yields competitive results
        for camera-primary 3D object detection on the Waymo Open Dataset (WOD). We
        show that co-training EMMA with planner trajectories, object detection, and road
        graph tasks yields improvements across all three domains, highlighting EMMA’s
        potential as a generalist model for autonomous driving applications. However,
        EMMA also exhibits certain limitations: it can process only a small amount of
        image frames, does not incorporate accurate 3D sensing modalities like LiDAR
        or radar and is computationally expensive. We hope that our results will inspire
        further research to mitigate these issues and to further evolve the state of the art in
        autonomous driving model architectures.

1 Introduction

Autonomous driving technology has made significant progress in recent years. To make autonomous
vehicles a ubiquitous form of transportation, they must navigate increasingly complex real-world
scenarios that require understanding rich scene context as well as sophisticated reasoning and
decision-making.
Historically, autonomous driving systems employed a modular approach, consisting of specialized
components for perception [Yurtsever et al., 2020, Li et al., 2022b, Lang et al., 2019, Sun et al., 2022,
Hwang et al., 2022], mapping [Li et al., 2022a, Tancik et al., 2022], prediction [Nayakanti et al., 2023,
Shi et al., 2024], and planning [Teng et al., 2023]. While this design lends itself to easier debugging
and optimization of individual modules, it poses scalability challenges due to the accumulated
errors among modules and limited inter-module communication. In particular, the expert-designed

   ∗Equal contributions; ‡ Equal contributions.
   †Contact emails: Mingxing Tan <tanmingxing@waymo.com>, Jyh-Jing Hwang <jyhh@waymo.com>.

Technical report. November 5, 2024.

interfaces between modules, such as the perception and behavior modules, may struggle to adapt to
novel environments because they are often pre-defined based on targeted scenarios [Bansal et al.,
2019, Jiang et al., 2023, Nayakanti et al., 2023, Seff et al., 2023]. End-to-end autonomous driving
systems [Hu et al., 2023, Zhai et al., 2023, Li et al., 2024] have recently emerged as a potential
solution, directly learning to generate driving actions from sensor data. This approach eliminates the
need for symbolic interfaces between modules and allows for joint optimization of driving objectives
from raw sensor inputs. However, these systems are often specialized for specific driving tasks and
trained on limited datasets, hindering their ability to generalize to rare or novel scenarios.
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [Gemini Team Google, 2023, Achiam et al., 2023]
offer a promising new paradigm for AI in autonomous driving that may help to address such
challenges. This is because MLLMs, as generalist foundation models, excel in two key areas: (1)
they are trained on vast, internet-scale datasets that provide rich "world knowledge" beyond what is
contained in common driving logs, and (2) they demonstrate superior reasoning capabilities through
techniques such as chain-of-thought reasoning [Wei et al., 2022] that are not available in specialized
driving systems. While recent efforts [Chen et al., 2024b, Tian et al., 2024] have explored integrating
and augmenting the capabilities of existing driving systems with MLLMs, we propose to develop an
autonomous driving system in which the MLLM is a first class citizen.
We introduce the End-to-End Multimodal Model for Autonomous Driving (EMMA), built on top of
Gemini [Gemini Team Google, 2023] without additional specialized components. Figure 1 shows
the overview of the EMMA framework. EMMA accepts camera images and plain text for other non-
vision inputs such as high-level driving commands and historical context. By recasting driving tasks
as visual question answering (VQA) problems, EMMA leverages Gemini’s pre-trained capabilities
while preserving its extensive world knowledge. After EMMA is fine-tuned with driving logs from
all tasks using task-specific prompts (see Figure 2 for more examples), its shared Gemini model
generates various driving outputs such as future trajectories for motion planning, perception objects,
road graph elements, and scene semantics. Our experiments showcase EMMA’s strong performance
on several planning and perception benchmarks despite this simple design. Additionally, we find that
EMMA can produce interpretable, human-readable outputs for many perception tasks such as road
graph estimation, and is able to function as a generalist model that is both scalable and robust for
autonomous driving. Notably, as used here and throughout the paper, the EMMA generalist model
refers to a machine learning model that has been trained and fine-tuned on a large volume of driving
data to perform a wide range of specific driving tasks in the autonomous driving domain.
We summarize our key findings below:

      1. EMMA exhibits strong performance in end-to-end motion planning, achieving state-of-
        the-art performance on public benchmarks nuScenes [Caesar et al., 2020] and competitive
        results on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [Chen et al., 2024a]. We also show
        that we can further improve motion planning quality with more internal training data and
        chain-of-thought reasoning.
      2. EMMA demonstrates competitive results for various perception tasks including 3D object
        detection, road graph estimation, and scene understanding. On the camera-primary Waymo
        Open Dataset (WOD) [Hung et al., 2024], EMMA achieves better precision and recall for
        3D object detection than state-of-the-art methods.
      3. We demonstrate that EMMA can function as a generalist model in the autonomous driving
        domain, which jointly generates the outputs for multiple driving related tasks. In particular,
        EMMA matches or even surpasses the performance of individually trained models when it
        is co-trained with motion planning, object detection, and road graph tasks.
      4. Finally, we show EMMA’s capacity to reason and make decisions in complex, long-tail
        driving scenarios.

Despite these promising results, EMMA is not without its limitations. In particular, it faces challenges
for real-world deployment due to: (1) limitations in 3D spatial reasoning due to its inability to fuse
camera inputs with LiDAR or radar, (2) the need for realistic and computationally expensive sensor
simulation to power its closed-loop evaluation, and (3) the increased computational requirements
relative to conventional models. We plan to better understand and address such challenges in future
work.

        2

      Router  )
High-level command    ||  Soho srience     ||
        pr                                 AN

        Jo
     n tex        eed                      A
    by        Model



        : -
        5 — Spatial reasoning Road comprehensionns Scenene ununderstanding
Figure 1: EMMA overview diagram. It takes 3 inputs (left): 1) a high-level command from the
router, 2) historical status of the ego vehicle, and 3) surround-view camera videos. The model then
predicts ego future trajectories (right) for motion planning that will be transformed into vehicle
driving control signals. Further, we can ask the model to explain its rationale (top right) before
predicting trajectories, which enhances both the performance and explainability of the model through
chain-of-thought reasoning. Notably, we incorporate visual grounding into the rationale so that the
model also predicts the accurate 3D/BEV location for critical objects. For completeness, we highlight
three additional capabilities of our model (bottom).

In the remainder of this paper, Section 2 describes the detailed method of EMMA for end-to-end
motion planning and generalist tasks in autonomous driving. In Section 3, we present experimental
results of EMMA on public and internal datasets. Finally, we discuss related works and limitations of
our work in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.

2 Method

EMMA is built on top of Gemini [Gemini Team Google, 2023], a family of MLLMs developed at
Google. We leverage the auto-regressive Gemini models that are trained to process interleaved textual
and visual inputs to produce text outputs:
        O = G(T, V) (1)
where G is the Gemini model, O represents natural language outputs, T represents natural lan-
guage prompts, and V denotes images or videos. The language output O = (o1, o2, ..., on) is
generated via next-token prediction, i.e., the output probability can be represented as
Qn P (o |o , T, V) for n output tokens. Our goal is to adapt P (O|T, V) =
  i=1 i <i G for autonomous driving applica-
tions, thereby harnessing the world knowledge obtained during its pre-training phase.
As shown in Figure 1, we map autonomous driving tasks into Gemini-based EMMA formulation. All
sensor data are represented as stitched images or videos as V; all router commands, driving context,
and task-specific prompts are represented as T; all output tasks are presented as language outputs
O. A challenge is that many of the inputs and outputs need to capture 3D world coordinates, such
as waypoint BEV (Bird’s Eye View) locations (x, y) for motion planning and the location and size
of 3D boxes. We consider two representations: The first is direct text conversion to floating-point
numbers, expressed as Tcoordinates = {(xi, yi)} ≈ text({(xi, yi)}), where the specified decimal
precision depends on the distance unit and decimal points. RT-2 [Brohan et al., 2023] exemplifies this
approach in robotic control. The second approach uses special tokens to represent each location or
action, formulated as Tcoordinates = {(xi, yi)} ≈ tokenize({(xi, yi)}), with resolution determined
by the learned or manually defined discretization scheme. MotionLM [Seff et al., 2023] leverages
this method for motion forecasting. We note that the two approaches have their respective strengths
and weaknesses. We opt for the text representation such that all tasks can share the same unified
language representation space and they can maximally reuse the knowledge from the pre-trained
weights, even though the text presentation may produce more tokens than specialized tokenization.

        3

2.1 End-to-End Motion Planning
EMMA employs a unified, end-to-end trained model to generate future trajectories for autonomous
vehicles directly from sensor data. These generated trajectories are then transformed into vehicle-
specific control actions such as acceleration and turning for autonomous vehicles. EMMA’s end-to-end
approach aims to emulate human driving behavior, focusing on two critical aspects: (1) first, the
use of navigation systems (e.g. Google Maps) for route planning and intent determination, and (2)
second, the utilization of past actions to ensure smooth, consistent driving over time.
Our model incorporates three key inputs to align with these human driving behaviors:
      1. Surround-view camera videos (V): Provides comprehensive environment information.
      2. High-level intent command (Tintent): Derived from the router, includes directives such as
        “go straight”, “turn left”, “turn right”, etc.
      3. Set of historical ego status (Tego): Represented as a set of waypoint coordinates in Bird’s
        Eye View (BEV) space, Tego = {(xt, yt)}−Tʰ for T timestamps. All waypoint coordinates
                    t=−1     h
        are represented as plain text without specialized tokens. This can also be extended to include
        higher-order ego status such as velocity and acceleration.
The model generates future trajectories for motion planning, represented as a set of future trajectory
waypoints for the ego vehicle in the same BEV space: Otrajectory = {(xt, yt)}Tt=1ᶠ for future Tf
timestamps, where all output waypoints are also represnted as plain text. Putting everything together,
the complete formulation is expressed as:
                Otrajectory = G(Tintent, Tego, V).                                                                    (2)
                          We then fine-tune Gemini with this formulation for end-to-end planner trajectory generation, as
    illustrated in Figure 1. We highlight 3 characteristics of this formulation:
      1.                    Self-supervised: the only required supervision is the future locations of the ego vehicle. No
                dedicated human labels are needed.
      2.        Camera-only: the only sensor input required is surround-view cameras.
      3.                                HD map free: no HD map is needed beyond the high-level routing information from a
                navigation system such as Google Maps.
                  While we are not the first to adopt this general formulation—[Li et al., 2024] conducted a thorough in-
    vestigation, particularly examining the impact of including the historical ego status—our contribution
    lies in adapting this formulation specifically for MLLMs for autonomous driving.

    2.2 Planning with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
                        Chain-of-thought Prompting [Wei et al., 2022] is a powerful tool in MLLMs that enhances reasoning
                             capabilities and improves explainability. In EMMA, we incorporate chain-of-thought reasoning
                   into end-to-end planner trajectory generation by asking the model to articulate its decision rationale
    Orationale  while predicting the final future trajectory waypoints Otrajectory.
                    We structure the driving rationale hierarchically, progressing from 4 types of coarse-to-fine-grained
    information:
    R1 -               Scene description broadly describes the driving scenarios, including weather, day of time, traffic
                     situations, and road conditions. For example: The weather is clear and sunny, and it is daytime. The
                   road is four-lane undivided street with a crosswalk in the middle. There are cars parked on both sides
                of the street.
    R2 -               Critical objects are the on-road agents that can potentially influence the driving behavior of the
                        ego vehicle, and we require the model to identify their precise 3D/BEV coordinates. For instance:
                pedestrian at [9.01, 3.22], vehicle at [11.58, 0.35].
    R3 -              Behavior description of critical objects describes the current status and intent for the identified
                critical objects. A concrete example is as follows: The pedestrian is currently standing on the sidewalk,
                      looking toward the road, and maybe preparing to cross the street. The vehicle is currently ahead of
                me, moving in the same direction, and its future trajectory suggests it will continue straight.
    R4 -            Meta driving decision includes 12 categories of high-level driving decisions, summarizing the driving
                plan given the previous observations. An example would be I should keep my current low speed.

                                4

We highlight that the driving rationale captions are generated using an automated tool without any
additional human labels, ensuring scalability of the data generation pipeline. Specifically, we leverage
off-the-shelf perception and prediction expert models to identify critical agents, and then use Gemini
models with carefully designed visual and text prompts to generate comprehensive scene and agent
behavior descriptions. Meta driving decisions are computed using a heuristic algorithm that analyzes
the ego vehicle’s ground-truth trajectory.
During both training and inference, the model predicts all four components of the driving rationale
before predicting the future waypoints, i.e.,
        (Orationale, Otrajectory) = G(Tintent, Tego, V). (3)
Where Orationale denotes an ordered text output of (R1, R2, R3, R4) for driving rationale. Empirically,
we observe that the prediction order of Orationale and Otrajectory does not result in a significant difference
in quality after model convergence. This suggests that we can predict Otrajectory first and apply early
stopping during inference for time-critical applications.

2.3 EMMA Generalist
While end-to-end motion planning is the ultimate core task, a comprehensive autonomous driving
system requires additional capabilities. Specifically, it must perceive the 3D world and recognize
surrounding objects, the road graph and the traffic conditions. To achieve this goal, we formulate
EMMA as a generalist model capable of handling multiple driving tasks through training mixtures.
Our vision-language framework represents all non-sensor inputs and outputs as plain text, providing
the flexibility necessary to incorporate many other driving tasks. We employ instruction-tuning, a
well-established approach in LLMs, to jointly train all tasks together with task-specific prompts
included in the inputs T of Eq. 1. We organize these tasks into three primary categories: spatial
reasoning, road graph estimation, and scene understanding. Fig. 2 illustrates the overall EMMA
Generalist diagram.
Spatial reasoning is the ability to understand, reason, and draw conclusions about objects and their
relationships in space. This enables an autonomous driving system to interpret and interact with its
surrounding environment for safe navigation.
Our primary focus for spatial reasoning is 3D object detection. We follow Pix2Seq [Chen et al.,
2022a] and formulate the output 3D bounding boxes as Oboxes = set{text(x, y, z, l, w, h, θ, cls)}
where (x, y, z) are the center location in the vehicle frame, l, w, h are the length, width, and height
of the box, θ is the heading angle, and cls is the class label in text. We convert a 7D box to text by
writing floating-point numbers with two decimal places, separated by spaces between each dimension.
We then represent the detection tasks using a fixed prompt Tdetect_3D, such as “detect every object in
3D”, as in the following:
        Oboxes = G(Tdetect_3D, V). (4)
While Oboxes is an unordered set of boxes, the predictions from an auto-regressive language model
are always ordered. We find that sorting the 3D bounding boxes by depth improves detection quality,
in contrast with the findings in Pix2Seq [Chen et al., 2022a].
Road graph estimation focuses on identifying critical road elements for safe driving, including
semantic elements (e.g., lane markings, signs) and physical properties (e.g., lane curvature). The
collection of these road elements forms a road graph. For example, lane segments are represented
by (a) nodes, where the lanes encounter an intersection, merge, or split and (b) edges between these
nodes following the direction of traffic. The full road-graph is composed of many such polyline
segments.
While edges within each polyline are directional, each polyline does not necessarily have a unique
order relative to the other elements. This bears similarity to object detection (e.g., [Carion et al., 2020,
Chen et al., 2022a]), where each box is defined by ordered attributes (top-left corner, bottom-right
corner), but a relative ordering between boxes does not necessarily exist. There are several existing
works that model polyline graphs with Transformers [Yuan et al., 2024, Liao et al., 2024a,b, 2023,
Ding et al., 2023, Qiao et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2023, Li et al., 2022a], sharing similarities with
language models.
Our general modeling formulation in EMMA is as follows:
        Oroadgraph = G(Testimate_roadgraph, V). (5)

        5

Task Prompts and        Camera Input (Video)    Answers  Decoded Visualization
ir      15                                       Pteorm

Detect everything in 30?        vericle....theta, J

    J

    EMMA:      Multimodal Mode


    temporary blocked?       Noteroadaneads
                                  car.
     {moretask prompts]    moretask answers)      ne

Figure 2: Illustration of EMMA Generalist. Starting with a task prompt (left), EMMA generates
a corresponding textual prediction (middle right), which can then be decoded into a target output
format, visualized and overlaid with the input image (right). EMMA Generalist is highly versatile,
capable of performing a wide range of driving-related tasks, such as end-to-end motion planning,
object detection, road graph estimation, and scene understanding Q&A. In the answer text, italicized
words represent placeholders that will be dynamically substituted with actual values during task
execution.

where Oroadgraph is a text-encoded road graph represented as waypoints, Testimate_roadgraph is a prompt
asking the model to predict the roadgrah, and V denotes the surrounding images.
We focus specifically on predicting drivable lanes, i.e., the lanes that the ego vehicle can drive towards
in the scene. These are neighboring lanes in the same traffic direction and lanes branching out from
the current ego lane. To construct Oroadgraph, we (a) convert lanes into sets of ordered waypoints and
(b) transform these sets of waypoints into text. It is beneficial to use sample-ordered waypoints to
represent both traffic direction and curvature. Just like detection, we also find that ordering lanes by
approximate distance improves the prediction quality. An example of our polyline text encoding is:
"(x1,y1 and...                     and xn,yn);..." where "x,y" are floating point waypoints with precision
to 2 decimal places, ";" separates polyline instances.
Scene understanding tasks test the model’s understanding of the whole scene context, which can be
relevant for driving. For example, roads can be temporarily obstructed due to construction, emergency
situations, or other events. Detecting these blockages in a timely manner and safely navigating
around them is essential for ensuring the smooth and safe operation of autonomous vehicles; however,
multiple cues in the scene are required to determine if there is a blockage or not. We focus on how
our model performs on this temporary blockage detection task, using the following formulation:
              Otemporary_blockage = G(Ttemporary_blockage, Troad_user, V),                             (6)
where Otemporary_blockage is the model output signaling potential obstruction, V denotes the surrounding
images, Troad_users denotes the all the objects on the road ahead, Ttemporary_blockage is the text prompt
"is the road ahead temporarily blocked?".

2.4       Generalist Training
Our unified vision-language formulation enables the simultaneous training of multiple tasks with a
single model, allowing for task-specific predictions at inference time through simple variations of the
task prompt Ttask. The training procedure is both straightforward and flexible.
For each task, we construct a dataset Dtask containing |Dtask| training examples. During each training
iteration, we randomly sample a batch from the available datasets, with the probability of selecting
an example from a specific dataset proportional to the dataset size:      P
     e        e     P |i.e., |Dtask|/                                                        |D . To train
                                                                             |, ensuring that the training
for       epochs, we set the total number of training iterations to × t Dt     t t|

              6

     Method                               ADE 1s  ADE 3s [ ADE 5s [ ADE 8s
     MotionLM [Seff et al., 2023]         0.045   0.251    0.694                      1.766
     Wayformer* [Nayakanti et al., 2023]  0.044   0.250    0.640                      1.517
     EMMA                                 0.032   0.248    0.681                      1.718
     EMMA+                                0.030   0.225    0.610                      1.553
    Table 1: End-to-end motion planning experiments on WOMD planning benchmark [Chen et al.,
    2024a]. EMMA+ denotes the models are pre-trained on our internal data. EMMA achieves promising
    performance on ADE 1s, 3s, and 5s. EMMA is slightly worse than Wayformer at ADE 8s, largely
    because the camera-only EMMA has higher depth error for longer distance than Wayformer, which
    uses all sensors including LiDAR, Radar, and Cameras. ∗Note that the Wayformer baseline is based
    on an enhanced internal version after the publication of [Nayakanti et al., 2023].


         0724 Driving Quality vs Number of Sampled Trajectories on WOMD
      on
    Jogo    EN
     gem        a

         number of sampled trajectories                                               h

    Figure 3: Ablation study on the number of sampled trajectories. As more trajectories are sampled,
    the quality measured by ADE@5s also improves, but the benefits diminish after 12+ samples.


ratio among tasks is governed by the relative dataset sizes. The optimal training ratio is influenced by
several factors, including task complexity, inter-task correlations, and the degree of transferability
across tasks.
Our experimental results demonstrate that the generalist model, trained across multiple tasks, consis-
tently outperforms each specialist model that is trained on a single task. This highlights the advantage
of the generalist approach: enhanced knowledge transfer, improved generalization, and increased
efficiency.

3 Experiments

We highlight the experiments used to validate the efficacy of EMMA model. We leverage the smallest
size of Gemini, i.e., Gemini 1.0 Nano-1 [Gemini Team Google, 2023] for all the experiments. In
the following section, we first present the results of end-to-end planner trajectory generation on two
public datasets in Section 3.1. Next, we conduct additional experiments on our internal datasets,
studying the impact of chain-of-thought and data scaling in Section 3.2. Section 3.3 focuses on
experiments involving three core perception tasks: 3D object detection, road graph estimation, and
scene understanding. Our co-training results for the generalist model are summarized in Section 3.4.
Finally, we showcase visual results that highlight EMMA capabilities in challenging, long-tail
scenarios in Section 3.5.

3.1 End-to-End Motion Planning on Public Datasets

We conduct the end-to-end planner trajectory generation experiments on two public datasets, the
Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [Chen et al., 2024a] and the nuScenes dataset [Caesar et al.,
2020]. EMMA is trained with the simplest end-to-end planner trajectory generation formulation as in
Equation 2. That is, given camera images, ego vehicle history, and driving intent, the model is asked
to predict the future ego waypoints for a certain time horizon.

        7

3.1.1 Driving on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD)

WOMD comprises 103k real-world urban and suburban driving scenarios, each lasting 20 seconds.
These scenarios are further segmented into 1.1M examples, each representing a 9-second window:
1 second is used as input context, and the remaining 8 seconds serve as the prediction target. The
dataset includes detailed map features such as traffic signal states and lane characteristics, along with
agent states such as position, velocity, acceleration, and bounding boxes.
WOMD is typically used for the agent motion prediction task, i.e., given the agent tracks for the past
1 second on a corresponding map, predict the positions of up to 8 agents for 8 seconds into the future.
We adopt the exact same setting but only train and evaluate the future motion prediction of the ego
vehicle, i.e. the autonomous driving vehicle, as the planning benchmark. In addition, we leverage
the ‘high-level intent command’ field, used for evaluating motion prediction, as the planning router
instruction. We adapt some of the best motion prediction models, MotionLM [Seff et al., 2023] and
enhanced Wayformer [Nayakanti et al., 2023], as the baselines of this planning benchmark.
During inference, sampling a final trajectory from multiple candidate trajectories plays a critical role
in the final performance. Both MotionLM and Wayformer generate 192 candidate trajectories, which
are subsequently aggregated into 6 clusters using k-means clustering, resulting in 6 representative
trajectories. The final trajectory is selected from these 6 representative trajectories based on their
associated probabilities. For fairness, we also sample multiple trajectories using a Top-K decoding
strategy, up to K = 24. We then compute the pairwise L2 distance between all trajectories and select
the one with the lowest average L2 distance as the final predicted trajectory, which can be viewed
as the “median” trajectory among all the predictions. In the ADE calculation, we treat this median
trajectory with the highest probability. All WOMD eval results are based on the validation set.
As shown in Table 1, our model achieved similar performance as the MotionLM baseline when
we train only on the WOMD dataset, with Gemini pre-trained weights. When pre-trained with our
internal dataset (denoted as EMMA+), our model surpasses both MotionLM and Wayformer up to
ADE 5s in the future. EMMA is only slightly worse than Wayformer at ADE 8s, where camera-
induced depth error becomes a prominent error resource. We note the differences in inputs between
MotionLM and EMMA: MotionLM takes inputs of agent location history, agent interactions, the road
graph, and traffic light states. These agent boxes are produced by specialized off-board perception
models that look at both past and future observations and are trained with a large amount of carefully
curated human labels, the road graph is manually generated using full run segments, and all inputs
heavily use LiDAR data with superior depth estimation. In stark contrast, EMMA only takes camera
images and ego vehicle history as input, without the need of any labels or additional models (besides
leveraging the Gemini pre-trained weights). Notably, for this work, we added internally available
image inputs, which are not currently in the released WOMD.
We further investigate the impact of the number of sampled trajectories on ADE, as illustrated in
Figure 3. The results highlight that sampling from multiple trajectories, rather than a single one, leads
to a notable improvement in ADE. However, the advantage of increasing the number of candidate
trajectories diminishes beyond a certain point.

3.1.2 Driving on the nuScenes Dataset

The nuScenes dataset [Caesar et al., 2020] offers a comprehensive autonomous vehicle sensor suite
for evaluation. It consists of 1,000 scenes, each spanning 20 seconds, and includes information from
6 cameras, 5 radars, and 1 LiDAR that collectively provide 360-degree coverage in the field of view.
The dataset is fully annotated with 3D bounding boxes across 23 classes and 8 attributes. In our
experiments, we follow the standard protocol for planning evaluation: predict the next 3 seconds of
future driving actions based on 2 seconds of historical data. We measure the planning quality with L2
errors at 1-, 2- and 3-second time horizons, aligning with established baseline methods.
As shown in Table 2, our self-supervised EMMA achieves state-of-the-art results in planning on
nuScenes, outperforming all previous supervised (with intermediate perception labels and/or human
labels) and self-supervised (no extra labels) methods. Under the same self-supervised setup, EMMA
outperforms previous BEV-Planner [Li et al., 2024] by 17.1% in average L2 metric; even compared
to DriveVLM-Dual [Tian et al., 2024] that heavily uses intermediate perception and human labels,
our self-supervised EMMA still improves the average L2 metric by 6.4%.

        8

     Method                      self-supervised?  L2 (m) 1s  L2 (m) 2s  L2 (m) 3s  Avg L2 (m)
     UniAD [Hu et al., 2023]            ✗             0.42       0.64       0.91       0.66
     DriveVLM [Tian et al., 2024]       ✗             0.18       0.34       0.68       0.40
     VAD [Jiang et al., 2023]           ✗             0.17       0.34       0.60       0.37
     OmniDrive [Wang et al., 2024a]     ✗             0.14       0.29       0.55       0.33
     DriveVLM-Dual [Tian et al., 2024]  ✗             0.15       0.29       0.48       0.31
     Ego-MLP∗ [Zhai et al., 2023]       ✓             0.15       0.32       0.59       0.35
     BEV-Planner [Li et al., 2024]      ✓             0.16       0.32       0.57       0.35
     EMMA (random init)                 ✓             0.15       0.33       0.63       0.37
     EMMA                               ✓             0.14       0.29       0.54       0.32
     EMMA+                              ✓             0.13       0.27       0.48       0.29
    Table 2: End-to-end motion planning experiments on nuScenes [Caesar et al., 2020]. EMMA (random
    init) denotes models are randomly initialized; EMMA denotes models are initialized from Gemini;
    EMMA+ denotes models are pre-trained on our internal data. EMMA achieves state-of-the-art
    performance on the nuScenes planning benchmark, outperforming the supervised (with perception
    and/or human labels) prior art by 6.4% and self-supervised (no extra labels) prior art by 17.1%.
    ∗Ego-MLP results are taken from a reproduced version in BEV-Planner.



  Scene description Critical object Meta decision Behavior description Relative improvements
        over baseline e2e planning
    ✓    ✗  ✗    ✗    + 0.0%
    ✗    ✓  ✗    ✗    + 1.5%
    ✗    ✗  ✓    ✗    + 3.0%
    ✗    ✓  ✓    ✗    + 5.7%
    ✗    ✓  ✓    ✓    + 6.7%
    Table 3: Ablation study on chain-of-thought reasoning components. It improves end-to-end planning
    quality by up to 6.7% by combining all elements. In particular, driving meta-decision and critical
    objects contribute the improvements of 3.0% and 1.5%, respectively. The details of each component
    is described in Section 2.2.



Unlike in WOMD, we note that sampling multiple trajectories did not yield significant improvements.
We hypothesize that this is due to nuScenes’ shorter prediction time horizon (3s) in simpler driving
scenarios. Thus, we report only top-1 predictions for our results.


3.2 End-to-End Motion Planning with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning on Internal Dataset

In this section, we present our studies of end-to-end planning with chain-of-thought on our internal
dataset. This dataset contains millions of scenarios, orders of magnitude larger than any publicly
available autonomous driving dataset. The model takes in 2 seconds of history to predict the driving
actions for 5 seconds into the future.
Table 3 presents the results of our experiments on chain-of-thought reasoning applied to end-to-end
planning. By adopting the chain-of-thought formulation introduced in Equation 3, we achieve a
notable 6.7% improvement over the standard end-to-end planning approach detailed in Equation 2.
We also conduct an ablation study to analyze the contributions of different rationale components. Our
findings reveal that both driving meta-decision and critical object identification significantly enhance
performance, contributing improvements of 3.0% and 1.5%, respectively. When these components
are combined, the gains are even more substantial. Conversely, while scene description has a neutral
impact on driving performance, it enhances the model’s explainability. These results demonstrate
that chain-of-thought reasoning can meaningfully improve driving performance, particularly when its
components are carefully selected and integrated.
We also perform a series of data scaling experiments for end-to-end planning, the results of which
are illustrated in Figure 4. As we train the model on a larger training set, we observe lower eval
perplexities before overfitting. Our findings indicate that the driving quality of EMMA has not yet
plateaued, even with the current large-scale dataset.

        9

        End-to-End Motion Planning Quality Scales with Training Data
        =
        52

        4857 mel
        46.07
        4526
        a 44.69

        training flops

Figure 4: EMMA data scaling experiments on our internal dataset. Each curve represents the eval
perplexity for end-to-end motion planning as training proceeds with more steps. The x-axis is training
compute, measured by floating-point operations (FLOPs) in log scale. The same EMMA model
is trained on four sizes of datasets that are sampled with different percentages from 3% to 100%
(denoted by different colors). In general, EMMA tends to achieve better quality until overfitting when
given more training compute, but it also overfits quickly on smaller datasets. We observe the driving
quality has not saturated when using the full large-scale dataset.

3.3 Perception Tasks

We summarize our studies on three main perception tasks: 3D object detection, road graph estimation,
and scene understanding.

3.3.1 3D Object Detection
We validate our 3D object detection performance on the 3D camera-primary detection benchmark
from the Waymo Open Dataset [Sun et al., 2020] using the d Longitudinal Error Tolerant (LET)
matching [Hung et al., 2024]. We evaluate two versions: EMMA and EMMA+, similar to earlier
sections, where EMMA+ is pre-trained on the 3D detection task using our internal dataset. The
quantitative results are reported on the official test set and summarized in Figure 5.
Our findings show that after pre-training, EMMA+ achieves competitive performance on the bench-
mark. Since our model output set of detected boxes without individual confidence scores, we directly
compare the precision/recall instead of LET-3D-AP, which is calculated based on the precision/recall
curve. We also compare the commonly used F1-score, where EMMA’s F1-score is computed using the
single precision/recall and other models’ F1-scores are calculated by picking the maximal F1-score on
the curve (often called F1-max). Figure 5 shows the performance comparison. In generally, EMMA+
demonstrates substantial improvements over state-of-the-art methods such as BEVFormer [Li et al.,
2022b], achieving a 16.3% relative increase in vehicle precision at the same recall, and a 5.5%
recall improvement at the same precision. EMMA+ also achieve better F1-score than prior arts.
Performance on the pedestrian class is also comparable to that of MV-FCOS3D++ [Wang et al.,
2021]. Additionally, we provide a performance breakdown across different ranges, highlighting that
our model performs especially well in the near range. Our results underscore that with sufficient data
and a large enough model, a multimodal approach can surpass specialized expert models in 3D object
detection quality.

3.3.2 Road Graph Estimation
Road graph estimation is a complex task that predicts a group of unordered polylines, each of which
is represented as a sequence of waypoints. We measure the quality of road graph prediction with
two metrics: (1) lane-level precision and recall, where we define a true positive match between a
predicted lane polyline and a groundtruth lane polyline if and only if their Chamfer distance is within
1 meter; and (2) pixel-level precision and recall, where polylines are rasterized into a BEV grid with
1 meter resolution – we then treat the BEV grid as a image and compute precision and recall based
on per-pixel matching.
As discussed in Section 2.3, this task involves several design choices. One is about the representation
of road graph polylines, where our choice is to define the start and end points of each lane, with

        10

       Pedestrian
       .

    \* os    J N

       a        \







    *
    oz  —   082 BEVFormer  oz  — BEVFormer

            082        0.63


            ds  do  ow a Wo
                on     0, 30
    Vehicle Range 0,30    Pedestrian Range









                           go
                           3        *
  Bo        |              Boe
                                    *
        *
  oz    —   090 BEVFormer      oz   —

                                     0.76


    Vehicle Range 30,50   ds  0  .  ow 30, 50 Wo
                               Pedestrian Range


                           —






    gos    *   \\                   \



                                h
        *                           *
                                    *
    oz    —     082 BEVFormer   oz  —   071 BEVFormer

        Fim                             060


        3 om ds 0 ow

Figure 5: Camera-primary 3D object detection experiments on WOD [Sun et al., 2020] using the
standard LET matching [Hung et al., 2024]. EMMA+ denotes model is pre-trained on our internal
data. EMMA+ achieves competitive performance on the detection benchmark in both precision/recall
and F1-score metrics. Compared to state-of-the-art methods, it achieves 16.3% relative improvements
in vehicle precision at the same recall or 5.5% recalls improvement at the same precision.



intermediate points added as needed to accurately capture the road’s curvature. Another critical design
choice is the construction of target label sequences used for model training. Drawing inspiration from
Pix2Seq [Chen et al., 2022a] in the context of object detection, one effective design choice is to pad
the targets and apply random shuffling. This technique helps the model handle unordered outputs and
prevents premature termination during training.
Figure 6 presents our ablation studies on various design choices. Starting from our best designs, we
systematically ablate each of the following configurations and assess the resulting quality degradation.
We then summarize the key insights from our analysis.
Polyline representation: dynamic sampling is better than fixed sampling. A simple polyline
representation is to sample a fixed number of sparse control points per lane, e.g. two end points plus
a fixed number of intermediate points to capture curvature. However, we find a better approach is to
dynamically adjust the number of points per polyline according to the curvature and length of the
lane. By keeping a consistent waypoint density rather than a consistent number of waypoints, we
achieve a representation that more accurately captures the lane structure intricacies, yielding around a
40% to 90% difference in the metrics as shown in Figure 6.

        11

        Ablation Study on Roadgraph Estimation
        5
  :Ew I=
  $e

  8 w lanedevel recall
        precision
        ® recall
        ed sem ron ted» 5 TE

 Figure 6: Ablation study on road graph estimation. To evaluate the influence of different components
 in our road graph estimation model, we ablate each configuration and measure the corresponding
 impact on quality. Dynamic sampling (leftmost) of road graph polylines based on lane curvature
 and length proves to be the most significant factor, leading to a substantial 70% to 90% change in
 lane-level precision and recall. In contrast, aligning the model with a language-like representation,
 i.e., semantic punctuation (rightmost), has a more modest effect, contributing to only <10% change
 in precision and recall of any metric.

 Polyline representation: ego-origin aligned sample intervals are better than naively aligned
 sample intervals. The road graph is typically stored and accessed in global coordinate frame,
 meaning lane origins and extensions are independent of the ego vehicle position. To improve
 accuracy, it is essential to adjust lane point samples to start from the ego vehicle coordinate frame
 origin. Specifically, sampling polyline points relative to the AV position (ego-origin) avoids arbitrary
 offsets that can arise from directly transforming points sampled in the global coordinate frame into
 the ego coordinate frame. This prevents a 25% to 60% drop in prediction quality.
 Target sequence construction: shuffled ordering is better than arbitrary ordering. We organize
 polyline targets into bins based on their endpoint distance from the ego vehicle, providing a rough
 global ordering. For instance, we categorize lanes into nearby lanes and those further away that serve
 as connecting lanes. During training, we dynamically shuffle the polylines within each distance bin
 to enhance the model robustness and coverage. This dynamic shuffling within each bin improves the
 model’s ability to generalize across different lane configurations, leading to more accurate predictions.
 Target sequence construction: padding is better than non-padding. Similar to Pix2Seq [Chen
 et al., 2022a], we find that padding targets to prevent early termination is highly effective. In addition
 to padding the total number of polyline targets, we also pad the number of points within each
 polyline. We use “invalid” tokens to represent padded points within polylines. Each polyline is also
 explicitly tagged with a final “valid” or “invalid” token to denote whether it contains any nonpadded
 points. This approach ensures consistent input sizes, which helps maintain the integrity of the model
 during training and reduces the risk of premature truncation, leading to more reliable and accurate
 predictions.
 Target sequence construction: adding punctuation and other semantically redundant token im-
 proves quality. In the target sequence construction, we notice that it is beneficial to use language-like
 structures and punctuation to group targets (e.g., "(x,y and x,y);..." instead of "xy xy;...").
 Additionally, explicitly including semantically redundant tokens – such as marking padded targets as
“invalid” instead of relying on implicit omissions of “valid” markers – improves performance. This
 approach, incorporating punctuation and redundancy, results in a boost of up to 10% in lane-level
 metrics. We attribute this improvement to the language-related pre-training of Gemini. By leveraging
 similar structured expressions, Gemini can be more easily adapted to other tasks.

 3.3.3 Scene Understanding
 Figure 7 summarizes our studies on the scene understanding task for temporary blockage detection.
 Our study is based on our internal datasets specifically curated for these scenarios. For this study,
 we establish our baselines by showing a picture to human and asking them to judge whether a
 lane is temporarily blocked. They can answer ‘yes’, ‘no’, or ‘unsure’. Our baseline will treat

        12

                                  Temporary Blockage Detection
                                                                  -
    ;     |                                                  |    I
               rect fen MAU        J.

    Figure 7: Scene understanding experiments. direct fine-tuning denotes solely using the tem-
    poral blockage data during fine-tuning; naive mixture denotes co-training this scene task with
    road graph estimation; mix + short pretraining denotes pre-training on road graph esitmation
    first, and then fine-tune on the mixture of both tasks; mix + long pretraining denotes a longer
    pre-training before fine-tuning. The naive fine-tuning is already close to strong human baseline, but
    long-pretraining with training mixture can further boost the quality.

    e2e planning || 3D detection || road graph estimation ||| Relative improvement over single task
                             e2e planning                                   detection      road graph
                    ✓    ✓        -                                       +1.6% (±1.0%)  +2.4% ( ±0.8%)
         ✓          ✓       +1.4% (±2.8%)     |                           +5.6% (±1.1%)        -
         ✓               ✓  −1.4% (±2.9%)                                       -        +3.5% (±0.9%)
         ✓          ✓    ✓  +1.4% (±2.8%)                                 +5.5% (±1.1%)  +2.4% (±0.8%)
    Table 4: Generalist co-training experiments. (±∗) indicates standard deviation. By co-training on
    multiple tasks, EMMA gains a broader understanding of driving scenes, enabling it to handle various
    tasks at inference time, while enhancing individual task performance. Notably, certain task pairings
    yield greater benefits than others, suggesting these tasks are complementary. Co-training all three
    tasks together yields the best quality.


all ‘unsure’ answers as incorrect, baseline+filtering will filter out all examples with ‘unsure’
answers. In contrast, our model is fine-tuned to predict ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for all examples. As shown in
the figure, our naive model that is directly fine-tuned for only this task achieves better performance
than the baseline comparison, but underperforms on the baseline+filtering comparison. To boost
the model performance, our first attempt is to co-train this task with road graph estimation, but the
naive mixture doesn’t improve performance. Our second attempt is to first pre-train the model on
road graph estimation, and then fine-tune on these two tasks. Results show when the pre-training is
long enough, the quality is boosted, showcasing the model’s ability to integrate multiple tasks for
enhanced performance.

3.4 Generalist

We explore the development of a generalist model by co-training on multiple tasks and analyzing
their synergies, as summarized in Table 4. For this study, we focus on three core tasks: end-to-end
planning, 3D object detection, and road graph estimation.
Co-training on all three tasks yields significant improvements, with the generalist model outperform-
ing the single-task models by up to 5.5%. Notably, when co-training two tasks, certain combinations
lead to greater gains than others. For instance, detection performance improves most when co-trained
with driving, and road graph estimation similarly benefits most when paired with driving. This
suggests that the driving task plays a particularly prominent and influential role, serving as a key
contributor to overall performance improvements.
We attribute these results to the complementary nature of the tasks. For example, road graph
estimation becomes easier when the model can accurately identify the locations of vehicles. Similarly,
driving quality is closely tied to understanding agent interactions, a skill enhanced by 3D object
detection. These findings suggest that pursuing a generalist model is a promising direction for future
research, with the potential for deeper insights into task synergies and performance optimization.

        13

3.5 Visualizations
We present 12 diverse visual examples in Fig. 8, 9 and 10, each selected to highlight the generaliz-
ability of EMMA model across a range of scenarios. In all the scenarios, we display the model’s
predictions (from left to right): end-to-end motion planning, 3D object detection, and road graph
estimation.
We group visual examples by scenario type: Examples (a)-(d) showcase how EMMA safely interacts
with rare, unseen objects or animals on the road. Examples (e)-(f) feature EMMA navigating through
construction areas. Examples (g)-(j) showcase EMMA following traffic rules at intersections with
traffic lights or traffic controllers. Examples (k)-(l) highlight EMMA respecting vulnerable road users
like motorcyclists.
Given these examples, we demonstrate the following capabilities of EMMA:
       • Generalizability: Adapts well to diverse real-world driving scenarios across different environments
        and attends to objects beyond its fine-tuning categories, such as squirrels.
       • Predictive driving: Proactively adjusts to the behavior of other road users for safe and smooth driving.
       • Obstacle avoidance: Consistently adjusts trajectories to avoid obstacles, debris and blocked lanes.
       • Adaptive behavior: Safely handles complex situations like yielding, construction zones, and following
        traffic control signals.
       • Accurate 3D detection: Effectively identifies and tracks road agents, including vehicles, cyclists,
        motorcyclists, and pedestrians.
       • Reliable road graph estimation: Accurately captures road layouts and integrates them into safe
        trajectory planning.
To conclude, these scenarios highlight EMMA’s capability to operate safely and efficiently in a variety
of challenging and diverse driving scenarios and environments.

4 Related Works

End-to-end autonomous driving research enjoys a rich history and has evolved significantly
since ALVINN [Pomerleau, 1988] employed shallow neural networks to predict control signals.
The field benefited from further deep learning advancements: e.g. DAVE-2 [Bojarski et al., 2016]
and ChauffeurNet [Bansal et al., 2019], leveraged deeper neural architectures and incorporated
sophisticated perception and motion planning modules respectively. Recent research has expanded to
include multimodal inputs [Codevilla et al., 2018, Prakash et al., 2021], multi-task learning [Chitta
et al., 2022, Wu et al., 2022], reinforcement learning [Chekroun et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2021,
Kendall et al., 2019, Liang et al., 2018, Toromanoff et al., 2020], and distillation [Chen et al., 2020,
Zhang and Ohn-Bar, 2021, Zhang et al., 2021]. Unified planning frameworks such as VAD [Jiang
et al., 2023] and UniAD [Hu et al., 2023] integrated planning with conventional modules in open-loop
environments. More studies have been proposed to examine the robustness, safety, and transferability
from synthetic environments to real-world domains. However, recent findings from Ego-MLP [Zhai
et al., 2023] and BEV-Planner [Li et al., 2024] revealed that these methods could potentially overfit
to ego status despite their good performance on benchmark tasks. Our work revisits the simplicity of
earlier end-to-end models such as ALVINN and DAVE-2, enhancing them with powerful MLLMs.
Vision language models for autonomous driving have gained increasing interest, focusing on
achieving explainable driving behavior and generalizability through end-to-end learning frameworks.
DriveGPT4 [Xu et al., 2024] utilizes LLMs to both explain vehicle actions and predict control signals
in an iterative Q&A format. Drive Anywhere [Wang et al., 2024b] introduces patch-aligned feature
extraction from MLLMs for text-based driving decision queries, while OmniDrive [Wang et al.,
2024a] features a 3D vision-language model design for reasoning and planning. Other approaches
use MLLMs in graph-based VQA contexts (DriveLM [Sima et al., 2024]), or apply chain-of-thought
reasoning (DriveVLM [Tian et al., 2024]) to tackle multiple driving-related tasks. For non-end-to-end
models, LLM-Drive [Chen et al., 2024b] leverages LLMs with object-level vector inputs for control
planning. In contrast, our work studies the end-to-end fine-tuning of a state-of-the art MLLM for
driving tasks, employing a generalist approach that emphasizes open-world driving capabilities.
Multimodal large language models (MLLM) extend LLMs [Vaswani et al., 2017, Devlin, 2019,
Raffel et al., 2020, Gemini Team Google, 2023, Reid et al., 2024, Chowdhery et al., 2023, Anil et al.,

        14

    yh





    Find    Find
    —       —   2


    (a) A garbage bag appears on the freeway, so our predicted trajectory suggests to nudge slightly to the
    right to avoid it.

        »        »
        2        &
    NN
    EN      NN
        EN







    (b) A ladder appears on the freeway, and our predicted trajectory suggests to switch to the left lane to
    bypass it appropriately.



    La    3


    se  ~    se  ~    se  ~

        <



    (c) we encounter a small squirrel on the road and our predicted trajectory instinctively slows down to
    avoid the animal. Note EMMA wasn’t explicitly trained to detect squirrels.







        TT ge ICR i GEE

       Bon ~ =~ ~

   (d) A white dog appears in our lane, and our model predicts to slow down and yield. Our model also
   accurately detects surrounding vehicles, including those in adjacent lanes and the parking lot.
Figure 8: EMMA prediction visualization. Each row contains a scenario with our model’s predictions:
end-to-end planning (left), 3D object detection (middle), and road graph estimation (right).


    15

    yard    yard    yard

    y=        \     y=    \


    (e) As a construction zone blocks the left lanes, our predicted trajectory suggests passing through on
    the right, while the road graph estimation correctly identifies the blocked area.

     Tae

    4      4                4
     if    NE
     |     Ze 3            BE
                            |
     =      LEE    EE
      po           TE Ne)        Ve]
    (f) Our lane is blocked by construction cones, so our predicted trajectory suggests to move into the left
    lane, even though it’s in the opposite direction. EMMA captured the blockage and performed a safe detour.






         SYP ia₁    THI TL    HY ;




    (g) A traffic controller signals to proceed through the intersection, and our predicted trajectory aligns
    with the instruction.

     an an pe


  (h) Our predicted trajectory suggests to stop as we approach an intersection with a yellow light,
  demonstrating cautious and safe behavior.
Figure 9: EMMA prediction visualization. Each row contains a scenario with our model’s predictions:
end-to-end planning trajectory (left), 3D object detection (middle), and road graph estimation (right).


     16

    1    |    |



                    p=

    — y7 =    4  — rs ||

    (i) While crossing an intersection, our predicted trajectory nudges slightly to the left due to nearby
    cars and a bicyclist partially occupying our lane.








                TVR    TR
    ff)  ff 8 £7  |      —



    (j) Our model predicts a driving trajectory to patiently wait at a red light (left). The model also
    accurately predicts surrounding 3D objects (middle) and road graph with lane centers (right).

        ’      Vi      ’        Vi           -             Vi
    [=     NY      [=           NY       [=            NY
                                                       i
    i          w   i            I.       i        I.
        ~~   1               =H
                               ~~   1        =H
        =H                                   ~~     1
                   pT       Pal
        vy   "a |g           NL      BE      ss     AR     |
        4     NY            7⁴     NY        4     NY
    (k) A fleet of fast-moving motorcyclists passes by. The predicted trajectory suggests pausing to allow
    them to pass safely. Notably, motorcyclists are accurately identified by our model (middle).









                   [eraᵀ
               | =]                      \                 | =]

    (l) A motorbike is moving on a narrow lane at night, and yields to the right. Our predicted trajectory
    adjusts, guiding us to pass safely by nudging slightly to the left.
Figure 10: EMMA prediction visualization. Each row contains a scenario with our model’s
predictions: end-to-end planning trajectory (left), 3D object detection (middle), and road graph
estimation (right).


                            17

2023, Radford et al., 2018, 2019, Brown et al., 2020, Achiam et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023a,b,
Dubey et al., 2024] to multiple modalities, leveraging their generalizability, reasoning capabilities,
and contextual understanding. Early explorations [Donahue et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2015, Chen
et al., 2022a] focused on specific vision-language problems or open-set object detection Liu et al.
[2024b], Zareian et al. [2021], Gu et al. [2022], while recent research has scaled up both trask diversity
and model sizes for improved generalizability and few-shot capabilities [Cho et al., 2021, Chen et al.,
2022b, Wang et al., 2022, Lu et al., 2022, Alayrac et al., 2022, Yu et al., 2022, Chen et al., 2023, 2024c,
Wang et al., 2024c, Peng et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2023, Lu et al., 2024]. Notable examples include
Flamingo [Alayrac et al., 2022], a 70B model [Hoffmann et al., 2022] which achieved state-of-the-art
quality for multiple few-shot vision benchmarks, and CoCa [Yu et al., 2022] a 2.1B parameter model
which demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on zero-shot transfer and various downstream tasks
including ImageNet classification. PaLI [Chen et al., 2023, 2024c], at 55B parameters, achieves better
performance across multiple vision and language tasks by scaling both the vision and language model
components jointly. These early works demonstrate the strong performance and generalizability of
MLLMs. Recent trends have seen the integration of native multi-modal inputs in LLMs, such as
Gemini [Gemini Team Google, 2023, Reid et al., 2024], GPT-4o, and Llama3-v [Dubey et al., 2024,
Liu et al., 2024a]. Our work explores the application of these promising new models for generalist
end-to-end autonomous driving.


5 Limitations, Risks, and Mitigations

In the previous sections, we demonstrate state-of-the-art end-to-end motion planning on the nuScenes
planning benchmark. We also achieve competitive performance for end-to-end motion planning
on the WOMD planning benchmark and camera-primary 3D detection on WOD. Furthermore, our
generalist setup improved the quality across multiple tasks through joint training. Despite these
promising results, we acknowledge the limitations of our work and propose directions for building on
this foundation and addressing such challenges in future research.
Memory and video capability: Currently, our model processes only a limited number of frames
(up to 4), restricting its ability to capture the long-term dependencies essential for driving tasks.
Effective driving requires not just real-time decision-making but also reasoning over extended time
horizons, relying on long-term memory to anticipate and respond to evolving scenarios. Enhancing
the model’s ability to perform long-term reasoning is a promising area for future research. This could
potentially be achieved by integrating memory modules or extending its capability to process longer
video sequences efficiently, enabling more comprehensive temporal understanding.
Extension to LiDAR and radar input: Our approach heavily relies on pre-trained MLLMs, which
typically do not incorporate LiDAR or radar inputs. Expanding our model to integrate these 3D
sensing modalities presents two key challenges: 1) There is a significant imbalance between the
volume of available camera and 3D sensing data, resulting in less generalizable 3D sensing encoders
as compared to their camera-based counterparts. 2) The development of 3D sensing encoders has not
yet reached the scale and sophistication of camera-based encoders. A potential solution to address
these challenges is to pre-train a large-scale 3D sensing encoder using data carefully aligned with
camera inputs. This approach may foster better cross-modality synergy and substantially improve the
generalization capabilities of the 3D sensing encoder.
Verification of the predicted driving signals: Our model can directly predict driving signals without
relying on intermediate outputs, such as object detection or road graph estimation. This approach
introduces challenges for both real-time and post-hoc verification. We have demonstrated that our
generalist model can jointly predict additional human readable outputs such as objects and road graph
elements, and the driving decision can be further explained with chain-of-thought driving rationale.
However, there is no guarantee that these outputs will be always consistent despite the empirical
observations that they are often indeed consistent. Furthermore, additional outputs incur significant
runtime latency overhead for deployment.
Sensor simulation for closed-loop evaluation: It is widely recognized that open-loop evaluation
may not be strongly correlated with closed-loop performance. To accurately assess an end-to-end
autonomous driving system in a closed-loop environment, a comprehensive sensor simulation solution
is necessary. However, the computational cost of sensor simulation is often several times higher than

        18

that of behavior simulators. This significant cost burden can hinder thorough testing and verification
of an end-to-end models unless substantial optimizations are made.
Challenges of onboard deployment: Autonomous driving demands real-time decision-making,
which poses a significant challenge when deploying large models due to their increased inference
latency. This creates a need for optimizing the model or distilling it into a more compact form
suitable for deployment, all while maintaining performance and safety standards. Achieving this
delicate balance between model size, efficiency, and quality is crucial for the successful real-world
deployment of autonomous driving systems, and represents a key area for future research.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we present EMMA, a Gemini-powered end-to-end multimodal model for autonomous
driving. It treats Gemini as a first class citizen and recasts autonomous driving tasks as vision
question answering problems to fit the paradigm of MLLMs, aiming at maximizing the utility of
Gemini’s world knowledge and its reasoning capability equipped with chain-of-thought tools. Unlike
historical cascaded systems with specialized components, EMMA directly maps raw camera sensor
data into various driving-specific outputs, including planning trajectories, perception objects, and
road graph elements. All task outputs are represented as plain text and thus can be jointly processed
in a unified language space through task-specific prompts. Empirical results show that EMMA
achieves state-of-the-art or competitive results on multiple public and internal benchmarks and tasks,
including end-to-end planning trajectory prediction, camera-primary 3D object detection, road graph
estimation, and scene understanding. We also demonstrate that a single co-trained EMMA can jointly
produce the outputs for multiple tasks, while matching or even super-passing the performance of
individually trained models, highlighting its potential as a generalist model for many autonomous
driving applications.
While EMMA demonstrates promising results, it is still in an early stage with challenges and
limitations on onboard deployment, spatial reasoning capability, interpretability, and closed-loop
simulation. Despite that, we believe our EMMA findings will inspire further research and progress in
the space.

Acknowledgement

We thank many collaborators: Michael Wei, Zoey Yang, Zhenpei Yang, Kan Chen, Ming Ji, Qichi
Yang, Yang Wang, Pan Li, Yan Jiao, Haricharan Lakshman, Ruotian Luo, Ningshan Zhang, Anant
Subramanian, Chao-Yeh Chen, Xuetao Hao, Andre Cornman, Cheol Park, Xi Chen, and Fei Xia. We
also thank the support from Srikanth Thirumalai, Vincent Vanhoucke, Kim Tran, Julia Ilina, Adam
Neustein, Ben Loewenstein, Chen Wu, Congcong Li, and Annie Cheng.










    19

References
J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman,
   S. Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds,
   et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. In NeurIPS, 2022.
R. Anil, A. M. Dai, O. Firat, M. Johnson, D. Lepikhin, A. Passos, S. Shakeri, E. Taropa, P. Bailey, Z. Chen, et al.
   Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
M. Bansal, A. Krizhevsky, and A. Ogale. Chauffeurnet: Learning to drive by imitating the best and synthesizing
   the worst. RSS, 2019.
M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp, P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller,
   J. Zhang, et al. End to end learning for self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016.
A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn,
   et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In CoRL, 2023.
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry,
   A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. In NeurIPS, 2020.
H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu, A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom.
   nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving. In CVPR, 2020.
N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and S. Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with
   transformers. In ECCV, 2020.
R. Chekroun, M. Toromanoff, S. Hornauer, and F. Moutarde. Gri: General reinforced imitation and its application
   to vision-based autonomous driving. Robotics, 2023.
D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Krähenbühl. Learning by cheating. In CoRL, 2020.
D. Chen, V. Koltun, and P. Krähenbühl. Learning to drive from a world on rails. In ICCV, 2021.
K. Chen, R. Ge, H. Qiu, R. Ai-Rfou, C. R. Qi, X. Zhou, Z. Yang, S. Ettinger, P. Sun, Z. Leng, et al. Womd-lidar:
   Raw sensor dataset benchmark for motion forecasting. In ICRA, 2024a.
L. Chen, O. Sinavski, J. Hünermann, A. Karnsund, A. J. Willmott, D. Birch, D. Maund, and J. Shotton. Driving
   with llms: Fusing object-level vector modality for explainable autonomous driving. In ICRA, 2024b.
T. Chen, S. Saxena, L. Li, D. J. Fleet, and G. Hinton. Pix2seq: A language modeling framework for object
   detection. In ICLR, 2022a.
T. Chen, S. Saxena, L. Li, T.-Y. Lin, D. J. Fleet, and G. E. Hinton. A unified sequence interface for vision tasks.
   In NeurIPS, 2022b.
X. Chen, X. Wang, S. Changpinyo, A. Piergiovanni, P. Padlewski, D. Salz, S. Goodman, A. Grycner, B. Mustafa,
   L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, J. Puigcerver, N. Ding, K. Rong, H. Akbari, G. Mishra, L. Xue, A. Thapliyal,
   J. Bradbury, W. Kuo, M. Seyedhosseini, C. Jia, B. K. Ayan, C. Riquelme, A. Steiner, A. Angelova, X. Zhai,
   N. Houlsby, and R. Soricut. PaLI: A Jointly-Scaled Multilingual Language-Image Model. In ICLR, 2023.
X. Chen, J. Djolonga, P. Padlewski, B. Mustafa, S. Changpinyo, J. Wu, C. R. Ruiz, S. Goodman, X. Wang,
   Y. Tay, et al. Pali-x: On scaling up a multilingual vision and language model. In CVPR, 2024c.
K. Chitta, A. Prakash, B. Jaeger, Z. Yu, K. Renz, and A. Geiger. Transfuser: Imitation with transformer-based
   sensor fusion for autonomous driving. PAMI, 2022.
J. Cho, J. Lei, H. Tan, and M. Bansal. Unifying vision-and-language tasks via text generation. In ICML, 2021.
A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton,
   S. Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. JMLR, 2023.
F. Codevilla, M. Müller, A. López, V. Koltun, and A. Dosovitskiy. End-to-end driving via conditional imitation
   learning. In ICRA, 2018.
J. Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019.
W. Ding, L. Qiao, X. Qiu, and C. Zhang. Pivotnet: Vectorized pivot learning for end-to-end hd map construction.
   In ICCV, 2023.

        20

J. Donahue, L. Anne Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach, S. Venugopalan, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell.
   Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description. In CVPR, 2015.
A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Yang, A. Fan,
   et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Gemini Team Google. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805,
   2023.
X. Gu, T.-Y. Lin, W. Kuo, and Y. Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision and language knowledge
   distillation. In ICLR, 2022.
J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. d. L. Casas, L. A. Hendricks,
   J. Welbl, A. Clark, et al. Training compute-optimal large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Y. Hu, J. Yang, L. Chen, K. Li, C. Sima, X. Zhu, S. Chai, S. Du, T. Lin, W. Wang, et al. Planning-oriented
   autonomous driving. In CVPR, 2023.
S. Huang, L. Dong, W. Wang, Y. Hao, S. Singhal, S. Ma, T. Lv, L. Cui, O. K. Mohammed, B. Patra, et al.
   Language is not all you need: Aligning perception with language models. In NeurIPS, 2023.
W.-C. Hung, V. Casser, H. Kretzschmar, J.-J. Hwang, and D. Anguelov. Let-3d-ap: Longitudinal error tolerant
   3d average precision for camera-only 3d detection. In ICRA, 2024.
J.-J. Hwang, H. Kretzschmar, J. Manela, S. Rafferty, N. Armstrong-Crews, T. Chen, and D. Anguelov. Cramnet:
   Camera-radar fusion with ray-constrained cross-attention for robust 3d object detection. In ECCV, 2022.
B. Jiang, S. Chen, Q. Xu, B. Liao, J. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Huang, and X. Wang. Vad: Vectorized
   scene representation for efficient autonomous driving. In ICCV, 2023.
A. Kendall, J. Hawke, D. Janz, P. Mazur, D. Reda, J.-M. Allen, V.-D. Lam, A. Bewley, and A. Shah. Learning to
   drive in a day. In ICRA, 2019.
A. H. Lang, S. Vora, H. Caesar, L. Zhou, J. Yang, and O. Beijbom. Pointpillars: Fast encoders for object
   detection from point clouds. In CVPR, 2019.
Q. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and H. Zhao. Hdmapnet: An online hd map construction and evaluation framework.
   In ICRA, 2022a.
Z. Li, W. Wang, H. Li, E. Xie, C. Sima, T. Lu, Y. Qiao, and J. Dai. Bevformer: Learning bird’s-eye-view
   representation from multi-camera images via spatiotemporal transformers. In ECCV, 2022b.
Z. Li, Z. Yu, S. Lan, J. Li, J. Kautz, T. Lu, and J. M. Alvarez. Is ego status all you need for open-loop end-to-end
   autonomous driving? In CVPR, 2024.
X. Liang, T. Wang, L. Yang, and E. Xing. Cirl: Controllable imitative reinforcement learning for vision-based
   self-driving. In ECCV, 2018.
B. Liao, S. Chen, X. Wang, T. Cheng, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, and C. Huang. Maptr: Structured modeling and learning
   for online vectorized hd map construction. In ICLR, 2023.
B. Liao, S. Chen, B. Jiang, T. Cheng, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Huang, and X. Wang. Lane graph as path:
   Continuity-preserving path-wise modeling for online lane graph construction. In ECCV, 2024a.
B. Liao, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Jiang, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, C. Huang, and X. Wang. Maptrv2: An end-to-end
   framework for online vectorized hd map construction. IJCV, 2024b.
H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee. Visual instruction tuning. In NeurIPS, 2024a.
S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying
   dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In ECCV, 2024b.
Y. Liu, T. Yuan, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and H. Zhao. Vectormapnet: End-to-end vectorized hd map learning. In
   ICML, 2023.
J. Lu, C. Clark, R. Zellers, R. Mottaghi, and A. Kembhavi. Unified-io: A unified model for vision, language,
   and multi-modal tasks. In ICLR, 2022.
J. Lu, C. Clark, S. Lee, Z. Zhang, S. Khosla, R. Marten, D. Hoiem, and A. Kembhavi. Unified-io 2: Scaling
   autoregressive multimodal models with vision language audio and action. In CVPR, 2024.

        21

N. Nayakanti, R. Al-Rfou, A. Zhou, K. Goel, K. S. Refaat, and B. Sapp. Wayformer: Motion forecasting via
 simple & efficient attention networks. In ICRA, 2023.

Z. Peng, W. Wang, L. Dong, Y. Hao, S. Huang, S. Ma, and F. Wei. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large
 language models to the world. In ICLR, 2024.

D. A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In NeurIPS, 1988.

A. Prakash, K. Chitta, and A. Geiger. Multi-modal fusion transformer for end-to-end autonomous driving. In
 CVPR, 2021.

L. Qiao, W. Ding, X. Qiu, and C. Zhang. End-to-end vectorized hd-map construction with piecewise bezier
 curve. In CVPR, 2023.

A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever, et al. Improving language understanding by generative
 pre-training. OpenAI blog, 2018.

A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsupervised
 multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.

C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu. Exploring the
 limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. JMLR, 2020.

M. Reid, N. Savinov, D. Teplyashin, D. Lepikhin, T. Lillicrap, J.-b. Alayrac, R. Soricut, A. Lazaridou, O. Firat,
 J. Schrittwieser, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.

A. Seff, B. Cera, D. Chen, M. Ng, A. Zhou, N. Nayakanti, K. S. Refaat, R. Al-Rfou, and B. Sapp. Motionlm:
 Multi-agent motion forecasting as language modeling. In ICCV, 2023.

S. Shi, L. Jiang, D. Dai, and B. Schiele. Mtr++: Multi-agent motion prediction with symmetric scene modeling
 and guided intention querying. PAMI, 2024.

C. Sima, K. Renz, K. Chitta, L. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Xie, P. Luo, A. Geiger, and H. Li. Drivelm: Driving with
 graph visual question answering. In ECCV, 2024.

P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik, P. Tsui, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine, et al.
 Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In CVPR, 2020.

P. Sun, M. Tan, W. Wang, C. Liu, F. Xia, Z. Leng, and D. Anguelov. Swformer: Sparse window transformer for
 3d object detection in point clouds. In ECCV, 2022.

M. Tancik, V. Casser, X. Yan, S. Pradhan, B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, J. T. Barron, and H. Kretzschmar.
 Block-nerf: Scalable large scene neural view synthesis. In CVPR, 2022.

S. Teng, X. Hu, P. Deng, B. Li, Y. Li, Y. Ai, D. Yang, L. Li, Z. Xuanyuan, F. Zhu, et al. Motion planning for
 autonomous driving: The state of the art and future perspectives. T-IV, 2023.

X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Li, Y. Liu, C. Hu, Y. Wang, K. Zhan, P. Jia, X. Lang, and H. Zhao. Drivevlm: The convergence
 of autonomous driving and large vision-language models. In CoRL, 2024.

M. Toromanoff, E. Wirbel, and F. Moutarde. End-to-end model-free reinforcement learning for urban driving
 using implicit affordances. In CVPR, 2020.

H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozière, N. Goyal, E. Hambro,
 F. Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
 2023a.

H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava,
 S. Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
 2023b.

A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. Attention
 is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.

O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan. Show and tell: A neural image caption generator. In CVPR,
 2015.

     22

P. Wang, A. Yang, R. Men, J. Lin, S. Bai, Z. Li, J. Ma, C. Zhou, J. Zhou, and H. Yang. Ofa: Unifying
   architectures, tasks, and modalities through a simple sequence-to-sequence learning framework. In ICML,
   2022.
S. Wang, Z. Yu, X. Jiang, S. Lan, M. Shi, N. Chang, J. Kautz, Y. Li, and J. M. Alvarez. Omnidrive: A holistic
   llm-agent framework for autonomous driving with 3d perception, reasoning and planning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2405.01533, 2024a.
T. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Pang, and D. Lin. Fcos3d: Fully convolutional one-stage monocular 3d object detection. In
   ICCV, 2021.
T.-H. Wang, A. Maalouf, W. Xiao, Y. Ban, A. Amini, G. Rosman, S. Karaman, and D. Rus. Drive anywhere:
   Generalizable end-to-end autonomous driving with multi-modal foundation models. In ICRA, 2024b.
W. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Chen, J. Wu, X. Zhu, G. Zeng, P. Luo, T. Lu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, et al. Visionllm: Large
   language model is also an open-ended decoder for vision-centric tasks. In NeurIPS, 2024c.
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting
   elicits reasoning in large language models. In NeurIPS, 2022.
P. Wu, X. Jia, L. Chen, J. Yan, H. Li, and Y. Qiao. Trajectory-guided control prediction for end-to-end
   autonomous driving: A simple yet strong baseline. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, E. Xie, Z. Zhao, Y. Guo, K.-Y. K. Wong, Z. Li, and H. Zhao. Drivegpt4: Interpretable
   end-to-end autonomous driving via large language model. RA-L, 2024.
J. Yu, Z. Wang, V. Vasudevan, L. Yeung, M. Seyedhosseini, and Y. Wu. Coca: Contrastive captioners are
   image-text foundation models. TMLR, 2022.
T. Yuan, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and H. Zhao. Streammapnet: Streaming mapping network for vectorized
   online hd map construction. In WACV, 2024.
E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, and K. Takeda. A survey of autonomous driving: Common practices and
   emerging technologies. IEEE access, 2020.
A. Zareian, K. D. Rosa, D. H. Hu, and S.-F. Chang. Open-vocabulary object detection using captions. In CVPR,
   2021.
J.-T. Zhai, Z. Feng, J. Du, Y. Mao, J.-J. Liu, Z. Tan, Y. Zhang, X. Ye, and J. Wang. Rethinking the open-loop
   evaluation of end-to-end autonomous driving in nuscenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10430, 2023.
J. Zhang and E. Ohn-Bar. Learning by watching. In CVPR, 2021.
Z. Zhang, A. Liniger, D. Dai, F. Yu, and L. Van Gool. End-to-end urban driving by imitating a reinforcement
   learning coach. In ICCV, 2021.










    23

